To be cynical – I know that this is not a fair metaphor because you cannot compare Milosevic seriously to Hitler – but nonetheless you can apply the same logic: Imagine a pacifist coming in ’44, ’43, to Europe and saying, “Isn’t there enough of killing, shouldn’t we stop this madness?” For example, I remember some of my leftist friends thinking that they’re saying something very profound when there was the question, “Should we send arms to Muslims, so-called Muslims, to the Sarajevo government or not?” and their argument was, “Wait a minute. Bringing more arms into that country will never lead to a peace. We should think about peace, not about putting more oil on the fire, not about bringing more arms there.” It sounds very deep, very sincere pacifism, but again imagine the same argument in ’43. Would you say to English people or to the French, “Okay, Hitler is horrible, but bringing more arms to Europe would just make it more crazy,” and so on and so on. There is something profoundly false in this pacifist neutrality, I claim. I think that’s my concluding thought.

Precisely, usually, a lot of people tend to assimilate a leftist position to opposition to bombing and the right-wing position to the support of bombing, or the left-wing position for Yugoslavia, the right-wing position for secession. But I think this is a totally false identification. First, it’s empirically not true. Point two: the lesson that we should take is that ultimately there is no neutrality. Neutrality as such, pacifist neutrality means – in the concrete situation – it always means taking sides. There is no way to escape that. Precisely as leftists we should be aware of that.

Sorry if I spoke too long. Thank you very much.

Maybe we have some time for discussion.

Moderator (Thomas Keenan): Slavoj has agreed to take some questions.

Question: [inaudible] are you not depriving other groups, including your own country, of historical agency?

Zizek: What do you mean by historical agency? I mean, I claim that each of other groups did have its agenda. What I know, because I was ten years ago pretty much involved in politics, and, for example, there was only one person at that point in ’88 between me and Tudjman. And I can tell you that Tudjman, the president of Croatia, in ’88, didn’t have not even a minimal idea of Croat independence. In ’88, Tudjman’s dream was a big pact with Serbs dividing Bosnia and kind of a sharing power with Serbs within unified Yugoslavia. So what I claim is that we simply have different agendas. I don’t think we were less agents because of that. We Slovenes did have our own agenda. Croats did have it. But what I claim is that the act which triggered disintegration was Milosevic. And I’m not blaming the Serbs, to avoid the minimum of misunderstanding. I say this without even the minimum of cynicism. I claim that of all – that’s the saddest paradox – of all nations in Yugoslavia, the ones with the longest historical democratic tradition are without any doubt the Serbs. We Slovenes are no one, are backwards, copulating with sheep’s, animals. I don’t have any illusions about us Slovenes. The point, the tragedy is that – you know, this is historical contingency. There was an open situation of, as my friend Ernesto Laclau would have put it, struggle for hegemony in the mid-’80s. There was an open situation. The point was who would seize the moment.

We Slovenes were simply lucky, not because we had any greater democratic tradition, but because of a series of totally contingent decisions, I claim. For example, proportional electoral system: we were lucky that in Slovenia, when socialism disintegrated, we didn’t get one big nationalist movement monopolizing, hegemonizing, the political space. The political field was much more dispersed, and this simply prevented any nationalist logic along those lines. So again, I think to prove that you are an agent, it’s not necessary to push into independence. The more tragic thing was that all other republics played too much opportunist games. For example, even in Bosnia, the true victims, are not quite innocent. When the war started – okay, in Slovenia it was only a kind of operatic short war – but then in Croatia it really exploded – Bosnians did play a strange game there. Their secret idea was, “let Serbs and Croats fight each other and then we’ll take over” – But of course this backfired terribly. So again, no, I’m not depriving them of agency. I’m just saying that what makes the war so horrible for me is that retroactively – okay, it’s easy to be a wise general after the battle – but how easy it would have been to prevent it earlier. I spoke with a lot of analysts who all agree: One simple measure would, one can reason, prevent the war. You remember when Yugoslavia disintegrated, or, as others would have put it, when Slovenia, Croatia, and others seceded. The usual American bemoaning is, Oh my god, didn’t we recognize Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia too early. I agree with it. But I think they should have withdrawn recognition also from Yugoslavia. I think a very simple thing that the West should have done in ’90, ’91, is to establish the fact that Yugoslavia no longer exists, and then to set a certain series of minimal criteria, and every entity – which is of course not only political democracy but also respect for national ethnic rights, and so on and so on – and then only states which respect this will be recognized. Instead of this, the West, I claim, played a game which was for a long time basically a pro-Serb game. I’m not saying this as being anti-Serb; on the contrary – and I can prove it to you, I wrote this eight years ago – at the end, the true victims of this are Serbs themselves now. So again, this is for me the tragic aspect of it: how easily it may have been avoided. I don’t see any deep fate, any deep necessity in this war. And in one thing I do agree. I had a public discussion with Zoran Djindjic, the leader of Serb opposition, who told something else, which is that, in contrast to this stupid journalistic cliché according to which people in the Balkans have this long memory, they never learn anything new, they never forget anything old. No. The Balkans, if anything, is the area where people forget extremely quickly, extremely fast. Already now, you can imagine how much black market and so on is going on between Serbia and Croatia, between Serbia and Bosnia, and so on. I don’t believe in any deep promise which will last I don’t know how long. I’m here now cautiously, moderately, an optimist, even as to this Serbian loss of Kosovo.