Since this trust is primarily ideological and military, not economic, the problem for the United States, was, in the last decade, how to justify its imperial role. You know, the United States needed a permanent state of war, so they had to invent the war of terror, offering themselves as the universal protector of all other normal, not rogue states. So I think the entire globe tends to function as a universal, not so much Rome, as Sparta. You know, you had in Sparta three classes: the homoi, the communist, the military, the traders, and the Helots, the slaves. We should have now: the U.S. is the military political ideological power, Europe, parts of Asia, Latin America, the industrial manufacturing region and the undeveloped rest – today’s Helots. In other words, global capitalism brought about a new general trend to oligarchy, masked as the celebration of the diversity of cultures. And equality and universalism are more and more disappearing as actual political principles. So, in very simple terms, this false balance based on radical imbalance of United States’ accumulated profits from around the world. This was our situation, and it is clear that it cannot go on indefinitely. For example, do you know that … two key foreign countries, Saudi-Arabia and China, the idea is that each of them owns around, I think, five to seven percent of the entire wealth of United States. And I tend to agree that it is this system, which is reaching its limit. This balance, which again, has a precise beginning and end, from those Nixon years. This, as it were, world balance based on United States deficit, which, in a way, it worked. It was a productive deficit. It was really like some kind of a divine sacrifice which turned the world around, which is why I agree with these ancient Greek metaphors and so on. And I like it very much how … although nobody believes in gods today … But did you notice how, more and more, even in our very rational, economic media, we use the language of prosopopoeia – ‘when things speak’? I mean, we may laugh at primitives, but turn to our media, which say ‘markets express their worry,’ ‘markets signal’ … my god, all the time referring to things speaking. How will markets react? Markets made clear their worry and dissatisfaction and so on. So, okay. Now let me go on.

One of the consequences of this new situation, and here problems begin, is, I think, that unemployment is acquiring a new status. Today, more and more, the world market is a space in which, everyone has once been a productive labourer, and labour has everywhere begun to prize itself out of the system. That is to say, in the ongoing process of globalization, I claim, the category of the unemployed acquires a new quality beyond the classical Marxist notion of the reserve army of labour. I agree here with Fredric Jameson, who proposed that one should consider, in terms of the category of unemployment, also those massive populations around the world, which have, as it were, dropped out of history. They were deliberately excluded from the modernizing projects of the first world capitalism. Written off as hopeless or terminal cases. So-called failed or rogue states, Congo, Somalia, victims of famine and ecological disasters, caught in pseudo-archaic ethnic hatreds, object of philanthropy and NGO’s. Often, of the war on terror. I mean … Here I am a little bit of a leftist paranoiac. I think that these famous NGO’s, non-government agencies, are usually the other human side of terror. The category of the unemployed should thus be expanded to encompass the wide span of population from the temporary unemployed to no longer employable, or permanently unemployed, up to people living in slums and other types of ghettos, and finally, the whole areas, populations, or states excluded from the global capitalist process. Like the blank spaces in ancient maps. Something like the, and I don’t even like her very much, ex-East German writer Christa Wolf. In one of her memoirs, she has a wonderful detail. She visited, years ago, with her daughter, that Fernsehturm in East Berlin. From there you can see the West. No wonder it was so popular in East Berlin. And, you must remember, this is a wonderful detail, that, I saw it, the East-German map of Berlin, is like a normal city map, but the West is just white, a blank spot. And she tells a wonderful story, Christa Wolf, that her daughter, at that time a small girl, looked to the West, and said: ‘Look mummy! It’s not white, people are also living there!’ That’s where we are today.

To this list, we should add also the illegally employed, those who work in black markets and slums, even under condition of different forms of slavery. Are we aware to what extent the economic rise of some of Middle East and Asian countries is basically sustained by slavery. I mean, I saw it first-hand. I went to a rich hotel in Dubai. Yes, I was there, where you will never be. But I did my Marxist duty, I became friendly with an ordinary taxi driver and he explained to me the horrors. What you don’t see. Literally, well not technically slaves, but people from Nepal, Philippines, Indonesia. Their passports are taken, they work for 12 hours a day, and if they are happy, working like slaves, they are able to send home around 150, maximum 200 dollars per month. The crucial point is that even those excluded countries, rogue states and so on, are nonetheless included into the world market. Let me mention the case of today’s Congo. Beneath the facade of primitive ethnic tensions, which explode again and again in this heart of darkness, you can, if you look at it closely, again, see a totally different picture. Congo, for the last two decades no longer exists as a state. Especially its Eastern part is a multiplicity of territories, ruled by local warlords, controlling their patch of land by an army, which, as a rule, includes drugged children warriors, each of the warriors then, with business links to foreign companies or corporations, exploiting mostly minerals, mining wealth in the region. So this fits everyone. The corporations get mining rights, without taxes, the warlords get money. And are you aware how crucial this is for our industry? That the key minerals for our laptops, cell-phones and so on come all from Congo? So it’s again absolutely crucial to bear this in mind. Congo is not naturally a ‘heart of darkness’, it is precisely as such that it is fully included in global capitalism. Then, we no longer have the category of ‘formerly employed.’ You know, with constant modernization this happens as a rule. The standard story is for example in textile factories. You have workers, mostly women unfortunately, doing their job there for 30 years, and then all of a sudden, modernization, they lose their job. What can they do? There is always an idiot like Anthony Giddens who comes and tells them: ‘you should use this as an opportunity to reinvent yourselves.’ But that’s easy to say.