We shouldn’t react to these heaps of waste by trying to somehow get rid of it. Maybe the first thing to do is to accept this waste. To accept that there are things out there that serve nothing. To break out of this eternal cycle of functioning.

The German philosopher Walter Benjamin said something very big. He said that we experience history, ‘what does it mean for us to be historical beings’, not when we are engaged in things, when things move, only when we see this, again, rest waste of culture being half retaken by nature, at that point we get an intuition of what history means.

Maybe this also accounts for the redemptic value of post-catastrophic movies like I Am Legend and so on. We see the devastated human environment, half empty factories, machines falling apart, half empty stores. What we experience at this moment, the psychoanalytic term for it would have been the ‘inertia of the real’; this mute presence beyond meaning.

What moments like confronting planes here in Mojave Desert bring to us is maybe a chance for an authentic passive experience. Maybe without this properly artistic moment of authentic passivity nothing new can emerge. Maybe something new only emerges through the failure, the suspension of proper functioning of the existing network of our life – where we are. Maybe this is what we need more than ever today.

What does the wreck of the Titanic stand for? We all know the standard reading of the impact of the sinking of the Titanic. Not only the film but the real accident. This sinking had such an impact because it happened in a society still at that point in all its glitz and glory unaware of the decay that awaited it in the near future – the World Wars and so on.

But there is something in excess of this entire field of meanings which is the very fascinating presence of the ruin of the Titanic at the bottom of the ocean. When James Cameron organised a trip to the real wreck of Titanic, he also made a similar remark. When the explorers approached the wreck, they had this almost metaphysical experience that they are approaching a forbidden territory in which the sacred and the obscene overlap.

Every effective political, ideological symbol or symptom has to rely on this dimension of petrified enjoyment. Of the frozen grimace of an excessive pleasure in pain.

What am I doing here in the middle of the ocean alone in a boat surrounded by frozen corpses?

I am in a scene from James Cameron’s Titanic, which is the supreme case of ideology in recent Hollywood. Why? Beause of the imminent tension of the story through out the film.

You have at least three levels. First there is what people ironically refer to as James Cameron’s Hollywood Marxism, this ridiculous fake sympathy with lower classes. Up there, first class passengers they are mostly al evil, egotistic, cowardly…

…embodied by Kate Winslet’s fiancé played by Billy Zane. This whole narrative is sustained by a much more reactionary myth.

We should ask what role does the iceberg hitting the ship play in the development of the love story.

My claim is here a slightly cynical one. This would have been the true catastrophe. We can imagine how maybe after two three weeks of intense sex in New York the love affair would somehow fade away.

Kate Winslet is an upper class girl in psychological distress confused, her ego is in shatters. And the function of Leonardo Dicaprio is simply that he helps her to reconstitute her ego.

Her self-image, literally he draws her image.

It’s really a new version of one of the old favourite imperialist myths. The idea being that when the upper class people lose their vitality they need a contact with lower classes. Basically, ruthlessly exploiting them in a vampire like way as it were sucking from them the life energy. Revitalised they can join their secluded upper class life.

The ship hits the iceberg not immediately after sex but when the couple goes up to the open space and decide to stay together.

Often in history the event which may appear as a catastrophe saves persons or an idea, elevating it into a myth. Remember the intervention of the Soviet army and other Warsaw pack (?) armies in 1968 in Czechoslovakia to strangle the so-called Prague Spring.

The attempt of the Czech democratic communists to introduce a more human faced socialism. Usually we perceive this brutal Soviet intervention as something that destroyed the brief dream of Prague Spring. I think it saved the dream. Either Czechoslovakia would have turned into an ordinary liberal capitalist state or at a certain point, which was usually the fate of reformist communists, the communist in power would be obliged to set a certain limit. ‘Ok you had you fun, your freedom, that’s enough, now we again define the limits.’ Again, the paradox is precisely the Soviet intervention saved the dream of the possibility of another communism and so on and so on.

So here again through the temporal catastrophe we have a love story which is at it were, redeemed in it’s idea – saved for eternity. We can ultimately read the catastrophe as a desperate manoeuvre to save the illusion of eternal love.