Now if you’ll just allow me to include, to make a total jump to a different domain. So, as you see, my vision is a very modest one. We are approaching a deadlock. I am not a catastrophist, I am not saying the deadlock is that at the end of this year, following some stupid Mayan calendar, whatever. No! I am only saying that we are approaching critical points. We can postpone them, but we are getting close. And that, we don’t have any, in the good old Marxist sense, ontological guaranty that there is a way out. It’s just, no. We should be like Pascalian theologists. There are signs, if we do something, we can make something out of it, or not. Now, just if you allow me two short points. The first one: What subjective attitude would fit today’s world? The first thing, to become engaged, the most important thing to do is to break out of the, what I naively call predominant form of subjectivity today, which is subjectivity focused on the notion of harassment. This narcissistic subjectivity where the other threatens you and so on. What do I mean by this? What is the inner logic of what is perceived or experienced as sexual harassment? It is the very asymmetry of seduction. The imbalance between desire and its object. At every way of an erotic relation … this is what I am afraid of in the politically correct fight against harassment. Of course I am against harassment. I am well aware of the brutality of harassment. I am just saying that this notion in its actual use covers something up, and with that I don’t agree.

The basic idea of this type of left-bourgeois, whatever, radicalized political correctness, is that this imbalance in the process of seduction, should be abolished, so that only contractual reciprocity, with mutual agreement is allowed. And there are even attempts to codify this. I learned that in some of those mysterious politically correct campuses in North-West of the United States, ideologically the most interesting part of the United States, there you have that either madness of political correctness, or madness of fundamentalism, that they even wrote the exact rules of it. Like, for example, it’s quite comical, that at every stage, you should ask for permission. Sorry, for this bad taste example. Let’s say I am trying to seduce a girl. Could I please put my hand on your breast? Could I please now unbutton ONE of your buttons? Could I slowly go down, and so on? But the result is interesting. I was in the campus where they did it, and they told me it works. But you know why? Because it’s applied with wonderful self-irony, you know? This is the only reason that it works. But let me go on. Are you aware that the secret model of political correctness, the anti-harassment attitude is that sexual intercourse gets basically desexualized, becomes a deal precisely in the sense of the equivalent market exchange between equal free partners, where the stuff exchanged is pleasure. I think that this is still the reason that I am more for Lacan or Freud, than for Michel Foucault. We are shifting from sexuality to pleasures, and I claim that part of this process is precisely the extreme of the real. The explosive expansion of pornography in digital media is, I think, exemplary of this process of sexualisation of sex. You are promised always more sex, you will see everything and so on. But the more you get it, the more it gets desexualized. What is effectively happening, I claim, in this politically correct mutual contract sexuality, and it is acquiring … Ok, I know, these are only signs from the future, dark signs, quite crazy forms. For example, I spoke just recently – he knows, where his next trip will be – to, Julian Assange, and he told me about the madness. He told me a wonderful thing. He showed me the model that Sweden is now moving in this extreme political correctness. The situation there, now, according to Assange, and I checked with my friends, they’re leftists and they confirmed it to me, is that, sorry for being personally vulgar. Let’s say that I am flirting with a woman. We both want to do it. But let us say that at a certain point, I discover that she hates Catholics. So I lie to her that I am not a Catholic, but a Protestant. And then, seduction goes on, no problem, she wants it, I want it – we do it passionately. Three weeks later, she learns that I am a Catholic. Not only can she prosecute me, but technically, our sex becomes rape. I become a rapist.

So, now comes a madness, contractual, which I like. Assange showed it to me. It is not yet legal, but they are already circulating among the legislating bodies, a kind of a contractual paper, like, the idea is this one. Let’s say again, the same situation: I am flirting with a woman, we both want to do it. But just so we can be sure, we say: ‘okay! we want to do it, so let’s first do this.’ So we both fill the contract, name, we sign, I have these illnesses, this is my religion, this is that… We both date it, sign it, and then we can happily jump into bed, like, you know, we are covered. Nobody did it. What I claim, is that what is really happening here, de facto, is that the partner is no longer a partner. In this, you know, we are coming back to Immanuel Kant. Kant as philosopher, not the dirty word. Namely, you know how Kant defines marriage? In a very contractual way, the famous passage from, not Grundlegung, but just Metaphysik der Sitten, two volumes, is that marriage is a contract among two adults, for the mutual use of sexual organs for pleasure. And Kant means it quite seriously. You might think he is kidding, but then look at the next page, where he debates what happens when, let’s say, a woman is married to a man, and the man runs away, does the woman have to right to bring him back by police? Kant says yes. Why? Because he ran away, with a part of his body, the penis, which contractually was also co-owned by her. But I think that what Kant was just dreaming about, in a comical way, is more or less, in this sense becoming true. I claim that, the ultimate point of this mutually contractual non-harassing sexuality are two things. (A) that the partner is ultimately reduced to an appendix to his, the partner becomes a composite of sex toys, if you like. We marry, we make a contract, but it really just means that I will make use of part of your body, and so on.