Even if we are dealing with apparently totally non-ideological brutality (‘I just want to burn houses, to get objects’), it is the result of a very specific social and ideological constellation where big ideology (striving for justice, equality, etc.) disintegrates, the only functioning ideology is pure consumerism, and then no wonder what you get is a form of protest. Every violent acting out is a sign that there is something you are not able to put into words. Even the most brutal violence is the enacting of a certain symbolic deadlock.

The great thing about the Taxi Driver is that it brings this brutal outburst of violence to it’s radical suicidal damage. We are not dealing here with something which simply concerns the fragile psychology of a distorted person, what Travis in Taxi Driver is, it has something to do with ideology.

Listen you fuckers, you screw-heads, here is a man who would not take it anymore. Who would not… Listen you fuckers you screw-heads, here is a man who would not take it anymore. A man who stood up against the scum, the cunts, the dogs, the filth, the shit. Here is someone who stood up.

In the Taxi Driver, Travis, the hero, is bothered by the young prostitute played by Jody Foster. What bothers him are, of course as is always the case, precisely his fantasies. Fantasies of her victimhood, of her hidden pleasure; and fantasies are not just a private matter of individuals – fantasies are the central stuff our ideologies are made of.

Fantasy is in psychoanalytical perspective fundamentally a lie. Not a lie in the sense that it’s just a fantasy and not a reality, but a lie in the sense that fantasy covers up a certain gap in consistency. When things are blurred, when we cannot really get to know things, fantasy provides an easy answer. The usual mode of fantasy is to construct a scene, not a scene where I get what I desire but a scene in which I imagine myself as desired by others.

Taxi Driver is an unacknowledged remake of perhaps the greatest of John Ford’s westerns, his late classic The Searchers.

In both films, the hero tries to save a young woman who is perceived as a victim of brutal abuse. In The Searchers the young Nathalie Wood was kidnapped and lived for a couple of years as the wife of an Indian chief. In Taxi Driver the young Jodie Foster is controlled by a ruthless pimp.

The task is always to save the perceived victim. But what really drives this violence of the hero is a deep suspicion that the victim is not simply a victim. That the victim, effectively in a perverted way, enjoys or participates in what appears as her victimhood, so that, to put it very simply, she doesn’t want to be redeemed, she resists it.

And this is the big problem, if I make an immediate jump to the political dimension, the big problem of American military interventions, especially so-called humanitarian interventions. From Iraq to already Vietnam half a century ago. We try to help them, but what if they really did not want our help? The result of this debilitating deadlock can only be an outburst of violence. We do get, towards the end of the film, Travis exploding in a killing spree. Killing the pimps, all the people around the young girl.

Violence is never just abstract violence. It’s a kind of brutal intervention in the real to cover up a certain impotence concerning what we may call ‘cognitive mapping’ – you lack a clear picture of what’s going on. Where are we?

Exactly the same holds for the terrifying bouts of violence Anders Behring Breivik’s murder spree in Oslo. Exploding a bomb in front of the government building and then killing dozens of young members of the social democratic party in an island close to Oslo. Many commentators tried to dismiss this as a clear case of personal insanity. But, I think Breivik’s manifesto is well worth reading. It is palpably clear there how this violence that Breivik not only theorised about but also enacted is a reaction to the impenetrability and confusion of global capital.

It’s exactly like Travis Bickle’s killing spree at the end of the Taxi Driver. When he is there, barely alive, he symbolically with his fingers points a gun at his own head; clear sign that all this violence was basically suicidal. He was on the right path, in a way, Travis of the Taxi Driver. You should have the outburst of violence and you should direct it at yourself, but in a very specific way, it won’t in yourself change you, ties you to the ruling ideology.

In Steven Spielberg’s Jaws, a shark starts to attack people on the beach. What does this attack mean? What does the shark stand for? There were different, even mutually exclusive answers to this question. On the one hand, some critics claimed that obviously the shark stands for the foreign threat to ordinary Americans. The shark is a metaphor for either natural disaster, storms or immigrants threatening United States citizens and so on. On the other hand, it’s interesting to note that Fidel Castro who loves the film once said that for him it was obvious that Jaws is kind of a leftist Marxist film and that Jaws is kind of a metaphor for brutal big capital exploiting ordinary Americans.