How does this work? I used this story years ago, and now I will again. Twenty years ago – I am so sad I didn’t put it on USB, I can show it to you – there was a wonderful British publicity for a beer, sorry Australian. You know that fairy tale where a woman sees a frog, kisses the frog, and the frog changes into a prince. Okay, this is how the publicity begins. The woman sees the frog, kisses him, and the frog is a nice young guy. But you know what happens then? The guy kisses the woman, and she changes into a bottle of beer. We are moving from you kiss a frog, you get a … But here I am a good pessimist, I agree that if you tell me that for most women, the practical experience is the opposite one, that you kiss a man, and then, when it is too late, you discover that he is a frog, but okay. What I wanted to say is that more and more, from this more masculine perspective, you reduce your partner to precisely a bottle of beer, a partial object. Okay, let me know really stop, just two or three minutes. First, which is why I think that what they are doing in some radical gay movements in the United States, where this contractual relationship even includes masochist practices of, you know, mutual torture, slavery, and so on, it’s part of the concept, that’s where we are. But, how to break out of this?

Ok, I have to finish, I will just tell you, something, I hope to conclude with a comical detail, but I take it very seriously. A good friend of mine, Adam Kotsko, wrote a book on ‘why do we like sociopaths?’[Why We Love Sociopaths: A Guide To Late Capitalist Television] I think I already used it in my class here, but it’s a wonderful story, I want to repeat it. And he noticed how, today, we have more and more sociopaths as heroes of our TV series. Different types of sociopaths: either simple, pathological fathers, who are brutal, just enjoy annoying others, like Homer Simpsons; or sociopaths, like brutal achievers, who are ready to kill, steal to succeed, or these avengers; sociopaths, like Jack Bauer, who, for some higher cause, are ready to kill and so on. And I think … and then Kotsko does a wonderful thing. He says, nonetheless, in each of these three types, there is some good, redemptive quality that we should stick to. With these cheapest, lowest sociopaths, like Homer Simpson, it’s this, you know, innocent joy, like when Homer Simpson with evil laser trap for his friend, he is so glad that he got the sucker, whatever. The simple joy of annoying the other. Then with these climbers, achievers, it’s this ruthless ingenuity, like, how they also find a way to make do. And with people like Jack Bauer, and that’s what I like in this book, the worst sociopath is for him dr. House – there you have the idea that you risk your private life and happiness for some cause. So I think that we should correct Stalin. You know, Stalin said in his famous answer to a question of a journalist in ’29: ‘what’s the image of a good communist?’ Stalin said that a good Bolshevik should combine Russian passion, dedication, with American pragmatic, practical spirit. I think we should say that today, what we need, is a person who unites the brutal dedication of Jack Bauer, the brutal spirit, opportunism, finding your way of someone Stringer Bell from The Wire, and this evil humour of Homer Simpson. Our only hope are people who unite these three features. Well, thank you very much.