So it’s truly that we can imagine a kind of a perverse scene of universal fraternity where Osama Bin Laden is embracing President Bush, Saddam is embracing Fidel Castro, white races is embracing Mao Tse Tung and all together they sing Ode to Joy. It works, and this is how every ideology has to work. It’s never just meaning. It always also has to work as an empty container open to all possible meanings. It’s, you know, that gut feeling that we feel when we experience something pathetic and we say: ‘Oh my God, I am so moved, there is something so deep.’ But you never know what this depth is. It’s a void.

Now, of course there is a catch here. The catch is that of course this neutrality of a frame is never as neutral as it appears.

Here, I think the perspective of Alex from the amazon Clockwork Orange enters.

Why is Alex, this ultimate cynical delinquent hero of Clockwork Orange, why is he so fascinated, overwhelmed when he sees the lady singing Beethoven’s Ode to Joy?

Whenever an ideological text sets all humanity unite in brotherhood, joy and so on, you should always ask: ok, ok, ok, is this all, really all, or some are excluded?

I think Alex, the delinquent of Clockwork Orange, identifies with this place of exclusion. And the great genius of Beethoven is that he literally states this exclusion. All of a sudden the whole tone changes into a kind of a carnavalesque rhythm. It’s no longer this sublime beauty.

We hear this vulgar music precisely when Alex enters a shopping arcade and we can see from his movements that now he feels at home. He is like fish in the water.

Beethoven is not the cheap celebrator of the brotherhood of humanity and so on, we are one big happy family enjoying freedom, dignity and so on.

The first part, which is falsely celebrated today, you hear it in all official events, is clearly identified with Beethoven as ideology and then the second part tells the true story of that which disturbs the official ideology and that of the failure of ideology to constrain it, to tame it. This is why Beethoven was doing something which may appear difficult to do. He was already in the purely musical work, practicing critique of ideology.

If the classical ideology functioned in the way designated by Marx in his nice formula from Capital Volume One: ‘Sie wissen es nicht, aber Sie tun es’ (They don’t know what they are doing but they are nonetheless doing it). Cynical ideology functions in the mode of ‘I know very well what I am doing but I am still nonetheless doing it.’

This paradoxical constellation is staged in a beautiful way in the famous song Officer Krupke in Bernstein’s and Sondheim’s West Side Story.

The delinquent gang enact a whole explanation, as a musical number of course, of why they are delinquents.

Addressing the police officer Krupke, who is not here but all is addressed at the police officer.

So one of them adopts the position of a judge.

The paradox here is how can you know all this and still do it? This is the cynical function of ideology. They’re never what they appear to be cynical brutal delinquents. They always have a tiny private dream. This dream can be many things. It can even be something quite ordinary.

Let’s take the English riots of august 2011. The standard liberal explanation really sounds like a repetition of the Officer Krupke song. ‘We cannot just condemn this riot as delinquent vandalism. You have to see how these people live in practically ghettos, isolated communities, no proper family life, no proper education. They don’t even have a prospect if a regular employment.’

But this is not enough because man is not simply a product of objective circumstances. We all have this margin of freedom in deciding how we subjectivise these objective circumstances which will of course determine us. How we react to them by constructing our own universe.

The conservative solution is ‘We need more police, we need courts, which pass severe judgements.’ I think this solution is too simple. If I listen closely to some of David Cameron’s statements, it looked as if ‘Ok, they are beating people, burning houses, but the truly horrible thing is that they were taking objects without paying for them.’ The ultimate things that we can imagine. In a very limited way, Cameron was right, there was no ideological justification. It is the reaction of people who are totally caught into the predominant ideology but have no ways to realise what this ideology demands of them so it’s kind of a wild acting out within this ideological space of consumerism.