So which is the right answer? I claim none of them and at the same time all of them. Ordinary Americans, as ordinary people in all countries, have a multitude of fears. We fear all kind of things. We fear, maybe, immigrants or people whom we perceive as lower than ourselves attacking us, robbing us. We fear people raping our children. We fear natural disasters, tornados, earthquakes, tsunamis. We fear corrupted politicians. We fear big companies, which can basically do with us whatever they want.

The function of the shark is to unite all these fears so that we can in a way trade all these fears for one fear alone. In this way, our experience of reality gets much simpler. Why am I mentioning this? Because isn’t it that, for example, the most extreme case of ideology maybe in the history of humanity, the Nazi fascist anti-Semitism work precisely in the same way.

Imagine an ordinary German citizen in the late 20s early 30s. His situation is, in an abstract way, the same as that of a small child. He’s totally perplexed. His social authority, symbolic order is telling him you are a German worker, banker, whatever, but nothing functions. What does society want from him? Why is everything going wrong? The way he perceives the situation is that newspaper’s lie to him. He lost his work because of inflation. He lost all his money in the bank. His moral degradation and so on; so what’s the meaning of this all?

The original fascist dream is to, of course as the dream of every ideology, to have a cake and to eat it. As it was often pointed out, fascism is, at it’s most elementary, a conservative revolution. Revolution – economic development, modern industry, yes. But a revolution which would none the less maintain or even reassert a traditional hierarchal society. A society which is modern, efficient, but at the same time controlled by hierarchal values with no class or other antagonisms.

Now, they have a problem here, the fascists, but antagonism, class struggle and other dangers is something inherent to capitalism. Modernisation, industrialisation, as we know from the history of capitalism, means disintegration of old stable relations. It means social conflicts. Instability is the way capitalism functions.

So how to solve this problem? Simple. You need to generate an ideological narrative which explains how things went wrong in a society not as a result of the inherent tensions in the development of this society but as the result of a foreign intruder. ‘Things were ok until Jews penetrated our social body. The way to restore the health of our social body is to eliminate the Jews.’

It’s the same operation as with the shark in Jaws. You have a multitude of fears and this multiplicity of fears confuses you. You simply don’t know what’s the meaning of all this confusion and you replace this confused multitude with one clear figure: the Jew, and everything becomes clear.

Remember I think around two, three decades ago when the prime minister of the United Kingdom was John Major, there was a kind of ideological campaign to return to morality and so on.

And all the evils of society were embodied in the conservative narrative in the figure of unemployed single mother. Like ‘there is violence in our suburbs? Of course, because single unemployed mothers cannot take care of their children, don’t properly educate them and so on.

We have a lack in our budget, not enough money, of course, because we have to support unwed single mothers and so on and so on.’

In an ideological edifice, you need some pseudo-concrete image like this to fixate your imagination and then this image can mobilise us. Imagine ideology as a kind of a filter, a frame, so that if you look at the same ordinary reality through that frame, everything changes. In what sense? It’s not that the frame actually acts anything; it’s just that the frame opens the abyss of suspicion.

If we look at the anti-Semitic image of the Jew it’s crucial to notice how contradictory this figure of the Jew is.

Jews are at the same time extra-intellectual like mathematicians, whatever—and vulgar.

Seducing innocent girls all the time and so on and so on.

Then much of the German public acclaimed the newcomer Jew, a deadly enemy. How could this happen? Of course, these ghetto Jews do no yet move well in their clean European clothes. Somewhat more adept are the Jews of Berlin. Their fathers and grandfathers lived in the ghetto, but that’s not outwardly noticeable. Here in the second and third generation, the assimilation has reached its zenith. Outwardly, they try to act just like the host peoples. People without good instincts, let themselves be deceived by this mimicry and consider the Jews the same as they are, therein lies the enormous danger. These assimilated Jews remain forever foreign bodies in the organisms of their host peoples, regardless of appearances.

This is typically for racism. You try to imagine how the other enjoys all the secret orgies or whatever because in racism the other is not simply an enemy, usually it is also invested with some specific perverse enjoyment. Or, in an inverted way, the other can be someone who tries to steal from us our enjoyments, to disturb, as we usually put it, ‘our way of life.’