This brings us back to the mystery of “fetishism”: when, by means of a fetish, the subject “believes through the other” (i.e., when the fetish-thing believes for the subject, in his other place), we also encounter this “bizarre category of the objectively subjective”. What the fetish objectivizes is “my true belief”, the way things “truly seem to me”, although I never effectively experience them this way; apropos of commodity fetishism, Marx himself uses the term “objectively necessary appearance”. Thus, when a critical Marxist encounters a bourgeois subject immersed in commodity fetishism, the Marxist’s reproach is not “A commodity may seem to you like a magical object endowed with special powers, but it is really just a reified expression of relations between people”; the actual Marxist’s reproach is rather, “You may think that the commodity appears to you as a simple embodiment of social relations (that, for example, money is just a kind of voucher entitling you to a part of the social product), but this is not how things really seem to you. In your social reality, by means of your participation in social exchange, you bear witness to the uncanny fact that a commodity really appears to you as a magical object endowed with special powers”.

On a more general level, is this not a characteristic of the symbolic order as such? When I encounter a bearer of symbolic authority (a father, a judge, etc.), my subjective experience of that person may be one of a corrupted weakling, yet I nonetheless treat him or her with due respect because this is how he or she “objectively appears to me”. Another example: in communist regimes, the semblance according to which people supported the party and enthusiastically constructed socialism was not a simple subjective semblance (nobody really believed in it), but rather a kind of “objective semblance”, one that was materialized in the actual social functioning of the regime, in the way the ruling ideology was materialized in ideological rituals and apparatuses. Or, to put it in Hegelian terms, the notion of the “objectively subjective”, of the semblance conceived in the “objective” sense, designates the moment when the difference between objective reality and subjective semblance is reflected within the domain of the subjective semblance itself. What we obtain in this reflection-into-semblance of the opposition between reality and semblance is precisely the paradoxical notion of objective semblance, of “how things really seem to me”. Therein resides the dialectical synthesis between the realm of the Objective and the realm of the Subjective—not simply in the notion of subjective appearance as the mediated expression of objective reality, but in the notion of a semblance that objectivizes itself and starts to function as a “real semblance” (the semblance sustained by the big Other, the symbolic institution) against the mere subjective semblance of actual individuals.

This is also one of the ways to specify the meaning of Lacan’s assertion of the subject’s constitutive “decenterment”: its point is not that my subjective experience is regulated by objective, unconscious mechanisms that are “decentered” with regard to my self-experience and, as such, beyond my control (a point asserted by every materialist), but rather something much more unsettling—I am deprived of even my most intimate “subjective” experience, the way things “really seem to me”, the fundamental fantasy that constitutes and guarantees the kernel of my being, since I can never consciously experience and assume it. According to the standard view, the dimension that is constitutive of subjectivity is that of the phenomenal (self-) experience. I am a subject the moment I can say to myself: “No matter what unknown mechanism governs my acts, perceptions, and thoughts, nobody can take from me what I see and feel now.” Lacan turns this standard view around: the “subject of the signifier” emerges only when a key aspect of the subject’s phenomenal (self-)experience (“fundamental fantasy”), becomes inaccessible, is “primordially repressed”. At its most radical, the Unconscious is the inaccessible phenomenon, not the objective mechanism that regulates my phenomenal experience.

The prima facie philosophical observation apropos of this paradox, of course, would be that modern philosophy long ago elaborated such a notion of “objectively subjective”. Therein resides the whole point of the Kantian notion of the “transcendental”, which indeed designates objectivity, insofar as it is “subjectively” mediated/constituted. Kant again and again emphasizes that his transcendental idealism has nothing to do with the simple subjective phenomenalism. His point is not that there is no objective reality, that only subjective appearances are accessible to us. There definitely is a line that separates objective reality from mere subjective impressions, and Kant’s problem is, precisely, how do we pass from the mere multitude of subjective impressions to objective reality. His answer, of course, is through transcendental constitution—the subject’s synthetic activity. The difference between objective reality and mere subjective impressions is thus internal to subjectivity; it is the difference between merely subjective and objectively subjective. This, however, is not what the Lacanian notion of fantasy aims at. To grasp this difference, we must introduce here the seemingly hair-splitting but nonetheless crucial distinction between “subjectively objective” and “objectively subjective”: the Kantian transcendentally constituted reality is subjectively objective (it stands for objectivity that is subjectively constituted/mediated), while fantasy is objectively subjective (it designates an innermost subjective content, a product of fantasizing, which, paradoxically, is “desubjectivized”, rendered inaccessible to the subject’s immediate experience).

However, it would be a crucial misunderstanding to read this radical decenterment involved in the notion of fetishism (I am deprived of my innermost beliefs, fantasies, etc.) as “the end of Cartesian subjectivity”. What this deprivation (i.e., the fact that a phenomenological reconstitution that would generate “reified” belief out of the presupposed “first-person” belief necessarily fails, the fact that substitution is original, the fact that even in the cases of the most intimate beliefs, fantasies, etc., the big Other can “do it for me”) effectively undermines is the standard notion of the so-called “Cartesian Theater,” the notion of a central Screen of Consciousness that forms the focus of subjectivity, and where (on a phenomenal level) “things really happen”.  In clear contrast to this, the Lacanian subject qua_$, the void of self-referential negativity, is strictly correlative to the primordial decenterment: the very fact that I can be deprived of even my innermost psychic (“mental”) content, that the big Other (or fetish) can laugh for me, believe for me, and so forth, is what makes me_$, the “barred” subject, the pure void with no positive substantial content. The Lacanian subject is thus empty in the radical sense of being deprived of even minimal phenomenological support: there is no wealth of experiences to fill in its void. And Lacan’s wager is that the Cartesian reduction of the subject to pure cogito already implies such a reduction of every substantial content, including my innermost “mental” attitudes—the notion of “Cartesian Theater” as the original locus of subjectivity is already a “reification” of the subject qua $, the pure void of negativity.