Listen kid, we’re all in this together.

In the ordinary theological universe your duty is imposed onto you by God or society or another higher authority and your responsibility is to do it. But in a radically atheist universe you are not only responsible for doing your duty, you are also responsible for deciding what is your duty.

There is always in our subjectivity, in the way we experience ourselves a minimum of hysteria. Hysteria is what? Hysteria is the way we question our social, symbolic identity.

You’re sure it’s God? You’re sure it’s not the devil. I’m not sure. I’m not sure of anything. If it’s the devil, the devil can be cast out. But what if it’s God? You can’t cast out God, can you?

What is hysteria at it’s most elementary. It’s a question addressed at the authority which defines my identity.

It’s ‘why am I what you are telling me that I am’. In psychoanalytic theory, hysteria is much more subversive than perversion. A pervert has no uncertainties, while again the hysterical position is that of a doubt which is an extremely productive position. All new inventions come from hysterical questioning and the unique character of Christianity is that it transposes this hysterical questioning onto God himself as a subject.

This is the ingenious idea of The Last Temptation of Christ as Kazantzakis’ novel and Scorsese’s film, namely the idea that when Jesus Christ in his youth is told that he is not only the Son of God, but basically God himself, he doesn’t simply accept it. This is for Jesus Christ, boy, traumatic news like, my God, why am I dead? Am I really dead?

How did we come to that unique point, which I think, makes Christianity an exception? It all began with the Book of Job as we all know things turn out bad for Job. He loses everything. His house, his family, his possessions and so on. Three friends visit him and each of them tries to justify Job’s misfortunes. The greatness of Job is that he does not accept this deeper meaning. When, towards the end of the Book of Job, God himself appears, God gives right to Job. He says, ‘Everything that the theological friends were telling Job is false; everything that Job was saying is true: No meaning in catastrophes.’

Here we have the first step on the direction of delegitimizing suffering.

The contrast between Judaism and Christianity is the contrast between anxiety and love. The idea is that the Jewish God is the God of the abyss of the other’s desire. Terrible things happen, God is in charge but we do not know what the Big Other, God, wants from us, what is the divine desire. To designate this traumatic experience Lacan used the Italian phrase ‘che vuoi?’ What do you want? This terrifying question: but what do you want from me?

The idea is that Judaism persists in this anxiety, like God remains this terrifying other. And then Christianity resolves the tension through love. By sacrificing his son, God demonstrates that he loves up. So it’s a kind of imaginary, sentimental even resolution of a situation of radical anxiety.

If this were to be the case then Christianity would have been a kind of ideological, reversal or pacification of the deep, much more shattering Jewish insight.

But I think one can read the Christian gesture in a much more radical way. This is what the sequence of crucifixion in Scorsese’s film shows us. What dies on the cross is precisely this guarantee of the Big Other. The message of Christianity is here radically atheist. The death of Christ, is not any kind of redemption of commercial affair in the sense of Christ suffers to pay for our sins. Pay to whom? For what? And so on. It’s simply the disintegration of the God, which guarantees the meaning of our lives. And that’s the meaning of that famous phrase: ‘Eli ele lama sabachthani’ Father, why have you forsaken me?

Just before Christ’s death, we get what in psychoanalytic terms we call ‘subjective destitution’ – stepping out totally of the domain of symbolic identification, cancelling or suspending the entire field of symbolic authority, the entire field of the Big Other. Of course, we cannot know what God wants from us because there is no God. This is the Jesus Christ who says, among other things, ‘I bring sword, not peace. If you don’t hate your father, your mother, you are not my follower.’ Of course, this does not mean that you should actively hate or kill your parents. I think that family relations stand here for hierarchic social relations.

The message of Christ is ‘I’m dying but my death itself is good news. It means you are alone, left to your freedom, be in the Holy Ghost, Holy Spirit, which is just the community of believers.’ It’s wrong to think that the second coming will be that Christ as a figure will return somehow. Christ is already here when believers form an emancipatory collective. This is why, I claim, that the only way really to be an atheist is to go through Christianity. Christianity is much more atheist than the usual atheism which can claim there is no God and so on. But nonetheless it retains a certain trust into the Big Other – this Big Other can be called natural necessity, evolution or whatever. We humans are none the less reduced to a position within a harmonious whole of evolution, whatever. But the difficult thing to accept is again that there is no Big Other – no point of reference which guarantees meaning.

We are in John Frankenheimer’s Seconds, a neglected Hollywood masterpiece from 1966, from the very heart of the hippy era, which preached unrestrained hedonism. ‘Realise your dreams, enjoy life fully.’ The film is the story of a late middle age businessman leading a grey totally alienated life and then he decides at some point that he has enough of it. Through one of his friends, he contacts a mysterious agency, which offers him a deal. They will reorganise his life so that he will be reborn.