Zizek: Basically I agree with you. I agree in what sense? I agree in the sense that I definitely do not share the nostalgia of those who now retroactively paint the Titoist Yugoslavia as any kind of a paradise, of a lost paradise. Everybody knows what was happening, that the regime had already started to break down in the early ’70s, and then in order to get another round of life, they wrote a new constitution where they put more power into the regime of the different six Yugoslav republics. The wager was that in this way local communist bureaucracies, in each republic, would gain additional legitimacy by presenting themselves as representing national interests against the Belgrade regime, and so on. And so I agree with you. What I’m only saying is that nonetheless – you see, that’s for me the dialectic of history; here I may be not a vulgar Marxist at least. What I reject is this simplistic pseudo-Marxist criticism of so-called formal rights. Yes, the rights can be formal rights, but nonetheless, formal rights themselves have certain institutional consequences [that] are materialized. Of course the old Yugoslavia was a false multiculturalism, but nonetheless, its results were a certain, however manipulated, coexistence, a certain level of tolerance.

For example, Bosnia itself was at least culturally a kind of a local success story. Isn’t it a nice paradox – and here you can see how Muslim in the region is not in itself a kind of fundamentalist madness – Bosnia, the Muslim-dominated republic, was the center of rock and pop culture, was absolutely the most, the republic of Yugoslavia where rock music was by far the strongest, where mutual tolerance was relatively open. So what I’m claiming is that in spite of all its obvious – I mean it was a totalitarian regime, undoubtedly – but nonetheless, a certain utopian idea was generated there, although of course the system – Okay, I’ll put it in this way: Of course the system couldn’t fulfill its promises, but failed on its own terms in the sense that it raised certain promises by presenting itself as multiculturalist tolerant. For example, another point which I think deserves a kind of a sign of recognition: Do you know that the old socialist Yugoslavia was institutionally the world center – which is now the politically correct term for gypsies, Roma, or what? – was the world center. Why? Because we gave them institutional support, they had their organization. So what I want to say is that even if something is a purely manipulative ideological invention, nonetheless it produces certain material effects. And when I say that in Bosnia in ’94, let’s say, they were fighting for Yugoslavia, I’m not saying they were fighting for the actuality of the old socialist Yugoslavia. I’m saying that simply they were fighting for that, let’s call it naively, utopian element which was represented in the old Yugoslavia, although it was of course, I agree with you, this was your point, actually kind of retroactive illusion. But nonetheless I found that here history is more complicated, that often such illusions, although they are only illusions, have a material efficiency of their own.

Zizek: I think I can give you at least one hint, which is the following one. Again, maybe this will make me some enemies, but what I’m radically opposed to is this, at least a certain version of so-called identity politics which goes into the direction of a) only we-the we you can then replace some ethnic minorities, some sexual orientation, whatever – only we can really speak for ourselves. I think this is a modern form of barbarism. I think it’s [a] complete catastrophe. We should absolutely speak to universality. The other aspect of this same attitude, of this same paradox for me is that I categorically reject – this would be the practical lesson – any assertion of particular political subjectivities which legitimize their specific claims on some of their specific properties, like, for example, at least if not herself, certain followers of Luce Irigaray. When you justify your demands in some of your specific properties, I claim that the moment you accept this game of identity politics where the point is to assert your specific identity, you are in a way lost. You are playing the game of apartheid. And paradoxical as it may sound, I claim that I tend to be surprised again and again to what extent so-called progressives today play the game of a renewed version of apartheid.

I put it this way: This doesn’t mean what it may seem to mean. I can well understand that in a certain situation you have to play this game of, for example, for blacks, we don’t mingle with whites, we want our own. But does not necessarily mean that you play the particularistic game, but you play this game because you know that the only way to assert your universality is in this way. I think that without this element of universality, the politics is lost. This is not an abstract universality. I’m sorry that I don’t have time to develop this now. The best presentation that I know of this position is again, Jacques Rancière, Misunderstanding. But he points out that the universality that I’m talking about here is not a kind of formal universality that in the Habermasian style you can then formulate. It’s just that, for example, when you have a certain situation, when you look at those at the bottom, the excluded ones, they have the right to say, “We stand for the universality.”

For example, in concentration camps – this is the thing I wanted and I didn’t have time, this had to be the other aspect announced in the title of this lecture, I wanted to go into Stalinism, Nazism, and so on – You know what was the most horrible phenomenon in concentration camps? The so-called Muselmaenner – “Muslims,” they were called Muslims. It’s a pure racist designation because in the European perspective they fit the racist idea of a Muslim, the one who prays in a repetitive way, repeats gestures, surrenders himself to fate. Muslims, to cut a long story short, were those prisoners of Nazi concentration camps, death camps, who simply lost their will to live. They were the living dead. They were the ones who simply didn’t defend themselves. You could have pushed them, you could steal from them, you could beat them. They just lived in their universe. The way they are described, it’s literally that their eyes lost this glimpse of vitality. There was something so horrible that, according to some reports that I’ve read, when Americans entered the concentration camps – you know, we all know these shots of hundreds, or even thousands, of bodies, heaps of bodies, nothing horrible about this – but they were too terrified to shoot the “Muslims”. There are almost no – apart from some passing, like for a split second you see them, they were not – This is the pathetic universality that I’m advocating. You’re saying the fate of humanity is decided there, how we treat them, that you take the lowest and you elevate it into the symbol of universality. So it’s a kind of a fighting notion of universality that precisely those – When in a social body you have some strata, some people who do not fit into it, who are out of place, displaced, and so on…