Then there is another thing. Not only people who all of a sudden become unemployable, but people who are educated, but while they are educated they are fully aware that there is even no chance that they will find employment in the domain for which they are educated. A whole generation of students has almost no chance of finding a corresponding employment, which of course leads to massive protest, and the reaction of the system to this are different reforms of education. Like this catastrophe that we call in Europe ‘Bologna Reform’, which means that education should be directly subordinated to businesses. If I were to be those in power, I would really worry about these unemployable students. Do you know why? Let me be frank, you never can have a revolution or radical unrest only with the poor people. You need the educated. And are those in power aware that by creating this whole new strata of middle-class highly education young people, who nonetheless cannot find a career, they are literally schooling them for the organic intellectuals. I mean, it’s absolutely clear that they play a key role in Egypt, in Greece today, and so on.

The next thing I want to add, is that this new structural unemployment should be conceived as a form of exploitation. I think we should also expand the standard Marxist notion of exploitation, which is, you know, linked to wage labour. You sell your labour force, surplus value is appropriated by the capitalist. I claim that we have to say that today, the exploited are not only workers producing surplus value appropriated by the capital. Exploited are also those who are structurally prevented from even getting caught in the capitalist vortex of the exploited wage labour. So, the paradox is that, as some economists put it nicely in very cynical terms, today, you have to be almost lucky to be able to be permanently exploited. To say, to have a permanent job. The true tragedy is when, and I am not saying this as an old-fashioned Marxist, you will see, I claim that, to use further in any meaningful sense Marxist terms, they have to be rethought radically. These are simply things that Marx couldn’t predict, they don’t enter his frame. But nonetheless, this would be my first proposal, we have to extend these two key notions – unemployment and exploitation – to understand what is going on. The third consequence of this is that in our politics, we were too obsessed by this liberal notion of Anerkennung, recognition. You know, left-liberal politics was basically predominantly a politics of recognition. You focus on marginal groups, you should recognize them, and so on. I think that exploitation is more crucial than recognition.

So okay, after this brief introduction, let me go on. So where do we stand now in 2012? 2011 was what I call, poetically, the year of dreaming dangerously. The revival of radical politics all around the world. Now, a year later, every day brings new proofs of how fragile and inconsistent this awakening was. The enthusiasm of the Arab spring is over, occupy Wall Street lost its momentum, and so on. But, I am even more a pessimist now, then I was. Because, even our good friend who will be here in August, Alain Badiou, wrote a book where he reads these awakenings, as it were. From Wall Street, to Tahrir square, as oohhh … Didn’t he publish a book precisely titled Le Reveil d’Histoire’, ‘the awakening of history’? Great emancipatory movements that we thought they are dead, are back here. Unfortunately, I don’t buy this. In what sense? I think that precisely this new awakening shows more than ever the limit of the left, at least of the traditional left. Just think what was the typical image of the left until the last decade. At least in the Western countries which were relatively prosperous. Their strategy was that okay, now we know that there is no revolutionary situation, but, you know, they like to play the Cassandra. But, wait a little bit, there will be crisis! blablabla. Ok so fuck you, now we have crisis, and we have unrests, but! the one who really doesn’t have any consistent project what to do is precisely the left. You know? Leftists should say: ‘Now! It’s our time.’ But, there is only one consistent economic – apart from some kind of confused Keynesianism – T.J. Clark, the British art historian, who published in the last issue of New Left Review, a wonderful brutal attack on today’s left, has a wonderful characterization of what the left, democratic Western left, dreams about. A partly detached, pseudo-nation state, with non-finance capital-driven capitalism. That’s the basic dream. Let’s not be controlled by international capital, let’s have a little bit more of a nation-state, but not the old nationalistic nation-state. Okay, we have to be in capitalism, let’s just limit financial capital, and so on. And, correct me if I am wrong, but if you cut all that crap about all that immediate democracy, blablabla, which means nothing, as far as I know, there is only one concrete idea, that the left has produced, which paradoxically is the idea of how to justify/legitimize capitalism. It’s, you know, the Belgian guy, [inaudible] did it. The so-called ‘basic income.’ I think, the more precise term is the way they call it in Brazil, renta basica. The basic rent. The idea that independently of your employment, all citizens should get a certain minimal income. At least to survive. But the paradox is that as van Parijs, I’ve read him, states it openly … this is how he tries to save capitalism. His premise is: ‘fuck it, capitalism is the only system that works. So, can we somehow keep it, but nonetheless make it more just,’ blablabla, and that’s his proposition. Now, T.J. Clark, when he … you see the catastrophe? It really is a catastrophe. Now that there should be the moment of the left. Yes, we do have all the unrest, demonstrations here and there, and so on. And then, and I was doing this throughout the last year. I was on occupy Wall Street, and I was asking them like crazy, a simple Freudian question, like, you know: ‘what does a woman want?’ But a real woman, not you Avital. No, sorry, you expected something like this. That was my way of saying I love you.