But going back to Christianity, I think that, again, the basic lesson for me is don’t accept – this is for me to use these bombastic terms here in a wild way – the false pagan attitude where you view each conflict as conflict of different particular powers, and then you try to play a kind of a neutral just position, like “it’s not only this, it’s not only them, all are partially guilty, let’s reestablish the balance,” and so on and so on. The Christian attitude, the way I – but again, I warn you, this is a materialist appropriation of a certain logic; I’m not a Christian, I’m an old-fashioned materialist, to make this absolutely clear – the Christian logic, the way I accept it, definitely would reject this abstract neutrality. All are not equal. Not all are not equal in the sense that one is a little bit more guilty than the others, but that they stand for different principles. That’s the paradox – now I will be clear – that one should accept.

When parties are struggling, as it often happens, it’s not simply that they both simply aim for their particular aims. Sometimes in the struggle one party stands for universality. Universality is always embodied in a particular agent. This is what you must accept. Universality is not a kind of a muddled compromise between different parts. No. There is an agent who says, “I am the universal,” which is why I meant it quite seriously when I said that human rights and democracy emerged out of Christianity. For example, as my good friend the French political philosopher – in his work La Mésentente [literally Misunderstanding, through translated as Dis-agreement; Politics and Philosophy] – Jacques Rancière developed how democracy began: the French Revolution, not when the Troisième État, the Third State, demanded also its own rights, not only aristocracy, not only clergy, but we also. This is not yet democracy. This is still this medieval balance, like we want our piece of the cake. No, democracy began when we said, “We, the ones who are excluded, we are the all, we are the people, we stand for universality.” When they said not, “We want our balanced share of the cake,” but when they said, “We stand for universality; you stand just for your particular interests”. So this is the risk you should take, not this false, “We are all equal, let’s make a compromise.”

Question: So you’re advocating that, you’re advocating an absolute point, an absolute stance, and forcing your domination? For instance, the French painted themselves into a position of power. So you’re advocating that? Is that what you’re saying?

Zizek: In principle, yes, although I see a trap in the way you put it. “You advocate your domination,” and so on and so on. You know what’s my point? Here we disagree. My point is that the position which I’m attacking, the position of “Let’s just demand our piece of the cake within the global order,” that already is the position of domination. It’s not that I want all while the others want only their piece of the cake. Let’s go to feminism. I claim that the only alternative to such an approach to feminism is, I think, what is the worst catastrophe for feminism, which is this grounding of feminism in the pre-Cartesian tradition. I have in mind here the claims that the Cartesian modern-age subject is a male chauvinist subject, before whose appearance there still was a proper place of women within the social body. Of course it was – the subordinated place inscribed in nature itself. I claim that all this search for some primordial matriarchal society, whatever, where you would have a more appropriate role, place, within the social body of women is, I think, a catastrophe because, again, even if you find there some kind of privileged position of women, it’s defined as position in kind of a total organic order, it’s simply a specific position. I claim that feminism in the modern sense becomes possible only with this Cartesian notion of subject which is the anti-subject, the denaturized subject, subject with no natural properties. It’s only in this way that you can ground radical feminism in the modern sense. Any return to this old organic notion, any feminism which plays the game of, “in the modern age the masculine principle was expressed too strongly, we need to reestablish the balance between the feminine and the masculine principle.” The moment that you accept this, you are lost.

But you know what’s the problem, where we maybe disagree. [inaudible] lesson to be learned from the history of ideology and so on, and I will be very brief. Let me make a simple point: Let’s take the opposition between left and right. It’s easy to say okay, neither of the two poles should dominate, there must be some kind of a balance of principle, not too much left, not too much right. But wait a minute. There is no way to formulate in a neutral way the terms of this balance because the difference – when there still was left and right, now there is not – What’s the paradox of the political opposition between left and right? It’s not only that we have a social body. Some people in the political body, some people are left, some people are right. The problem is that if you ask a right-winger how he sees the whole of society, he will give you a totally different picture than a left-winger. A right-winger is usually a corporatist. A right-winger would have said, Society is a corporate body. It [inaudible], and then there are left extremists or whatever who disintegrate the body. A left-winger would give you – You know what I mean, there is no simple difference between left and right. Left and right differ in the very way they see their difference. In this sense I claim that you must aim at universality. This is what you must be conscious of, that when you fight for your position, you at the same time fight for the universal frame of how your position will be perceived within this universal frame. This is for me, as every good feminist will tell you, the greatness of modern feminism. It’s not just we women want more. It’s we women want to redefine the very universality of what it means to be human. This is for me this modern notion of political struggle.