Is not the primordial version of this substitution, by which “somebody else does it for me”, the very substitution of a signifier for the subject? In such a substitution resides the basic, constitutive feature of the symbolic order: a signifier is precisely an object-thing that substitutes for me, acts in my place. The so-called primitive religions in which another human being can assume my suffering, my punishment (but also my laughter, my enjoyment), in which one can suffer and pay the price for a sin through the Other (including prayer wheels that do the praying for you), are not as stupid and “primitive” as they may seem, for they harbor a momentous liberating potential. By way of surrendering my innermost content, including my dreams and anxieties, to the Other, a space opens up in which I am free to breathe: when the Other laughs for me, I am free to take a rest; when the Other is sacrificed instead of me, I am free to go on living with the awareness that I have paid for my guilt, and so on. The efficiency of this operation of substitution resides in the Hegelian reflective reversal: when the Other is sacrificed for me, I sacrifice myself through the Other; when the Other acts for me, I myself act through the Other; when the Other enjoys for me, I myself enjoy through the Other. Which is like the good old joke about the difference between Soviet-style bureaucratic socialism and the Yugoslav self-management socialism: in Russia, members of the nomenklatura, the representatives of the ordinary people, drive themselves in expensive limousines, while in Yugoslavia, ordinary people themselves ride in limousines through their representatives.

This liberating potential of mechanical rituals is also clearly discernible in our modern experience. Every intellectual knows the redeeming value of being temporarily subjected to the military drill, to the requirements of a “primitive” physical job, or to similar externally regulated labor—the very awareness that the Other regulates the process in which I participate sets my mind free, since I know I am not involved. The Foucauldian motif of the interconnection between discipline and subjective freedom thus appears in a different light: by submitting myself to some disciplinary machine, I transfer to the Other the responsibility to maintain the smooth running of things and thus gain the precious space in which to exercise my freedom.

The one who originally “does it for me” is the signifier itself in its external materiality, from the “canned prayer” in the Tibetan prayer wheel to the “canned laughter” on our TV: the basic feature of the symbolic order qua “big Other” is that it is never simply a tool or means of communication, since it “decenters” the subject from within, in the sense of accomplishing his act for him. This gap between the subject and the signifier that “does it for him,” is clearly discernible in everyday experience: when a person slips, another person standing next to him and merely observing the accident can accompany it with “Oops!” or something similar. The mystery of this everyday occurrence is that, when the other does it for me, in my place, its symbolic efficiency is exactly the same as if I had done it directly. Therein resides the paradox of the notion of the “performative” or speech act: in the very gesture of accomplishing an act by uttering words, I am deprived of authorship; the “big Other” (the symbolic institution) speaks through me. It is no wonder, then, that there is something puppet-like about the persons whose professional function is essentially performative (judges, kings): they are reduced to a living embodiment of the symbolic institution, whereby their sole duty is to “dot the i’s” mechanically, to confer an institutional cachet on a content elaborated by others. The later Lacan is fully justified in reserving the term “act” for something much more suicidal and real than a speech act.

This mystery of the symbolic order is exemplified by the enigmatic status of what we call “politeness”: when, upon meeting an acquaintance, I say “Glad to see you ! How are you today?”, it is clear to both of us that, in a way, I “do not mean it seriously” (if my partner suspects that I am really interested, he or she may even be unpleasantly surprised, as though I were aiming at something too intimate and of no concern to me—or, to paraphrase the old Freudian joke, “Why are you saying you’re glad to see me, when you’re really glad to see me?”). However, it would still be wrong to designate my act as simply “hypocritical”, since, in another way, I do mean it: the polite exchange does establish a kind of pact between the two of us, in the same way that I do “sincerely” laugh through the canned laughter (as proven by the fact that I do effectively “feel relieved” afterward).

If we radicalize the relationship of substitution (i.e., the first aspect of the notion of fetishism) in this way, then the connection between the two aspects, the opposition “persons versus things,” their relation of substitution (“things instead of people,” or one person instead of another, or a signifier instead of the signified), and the opposition “structure versus one of its elements,” becomes clear: the differential/formal structure occluded by the element-fetish can only emerge if the gesture of substitution has already occurred. In other words, the structure is always, by definition, a signifying structure, a structure of signifiers that are substituted for the signified content, not a structure of the signified. In order for the differential/formal structure to emerge, the real has to redouble itself in the symbolic register; a reduplicatio has to occur, on account of which things no longer count as what they directly “are”, but only with regard to their symbolic place. This primordial substitution of the big Other, the Symbolic Order, for the Real of the immediate life-substance (in Lacanian terms: of A – le grand Autre – for J – jouissance), gives rise to $, the “barred subject” who is then “represented” by the signifiers, on whose behalf signifiers “act”, or who acts through signifiers.

Against this background, it is tempting to supplement the fashionable notion of “interactivity” with its shadowy and much more uncanny double, the notion of “interpassivity”.  In other words, it is commonplace to emphasize how, with the new electronic media, the passive consumption of a text or a work of art is over: I no longer merely stare at the screen, I increasingly interact with it, in a dialogic relationship that goes from choosing the programs, through participating in debates in a Virtual Community, to directly determining the outcome of the plot in so-called “interactive narratives”. Those who praise the democratic potential of new media generally focus on precisely these features: how cyberspace opens up the possibility for the large majority of people to break out of the role of the passive observer following a spectacle staged by others, not only to participate actively in the spectacle, but more and more to establish its very rules. But isn’t the other side of this interactivity interpassivity? Isn’t the necessary obverse of my interacting with the object instead of passively following the show the situation in which the object itself deprives me of my own passive reaction of satisfaction (or mourning or laughter), so that it is the object itself that “enjoys the show” instead of me, relieving me of the superego duty to enjoy myself? Do we not witness “interpassivity” in a great number of today’s TV or billboard ads, which, as it were, passively enjoy the product instead of us? (Coke cans bearing the inscription “Ooh! Ooh! What taste !” emulate in advance the ideal customer’s reaction.) Another strange phenomenon brings us closer to the heart of the matter: almost every VCR aficionado who compulsively records hundreds of movies (myself among them) is well aware that the immediate effect of owning a VCR is that you effectively watch fewer films than in the good old days of a simple TV set without VCR; you never have time for TV, so instead of wasting a precious evening, you simply tape the film and store it for a future viewing (for which, of course, there is almost never time.). Although I do not actually watch films, the very awareness that the films I love are stored in my video library gives me profound satisfaction and, occasionally, enables me to relax and indulge in the exquisite art of far niente—as if the VCR were in a way watching them for me, in my place. The VCR stands here for the “big Other”, the medium of symbolic registration.