My dear I’ve been shopping till I’m dropping. My feet are nearly off and my throat’s parched. I thought of having tea at spindles but I was terrified of losing the train. Oh dear.

How do you do ?

Oh would you be a perfect dear and get me a cup of tea I really don’t think I could drag my poor old bones up to the counter.

Why is this situation so interesting? Because on the one hand we cannot but experience this annoying lady as a brutal intruder.

Instead of the two lovers being allowed at least their final moments alone they have to maintain the appearances that nothing is happening between them, that they are just acquaintances and so on and so on.

This precisely is the function of the Big Other. We need for our stability, a figure of Big Other for whom we maintain appearances.

But are things really as simple as that? The next scene Celia Johnson totally desperate, she knows she will never again see her lover…

Then we hear the line of Celia Johnson’s thought.

What is the nature of this deadlock of Celia Johnson? She is split between the two figures in the film of the Big Other. On the one hand, it’s her husband, the ideal listener, but it’s out of question to confess to him.

On the other hand, you hear this stupid person who is available as a confessor but there is not even an elementary trust.

So that’s the tragedy of our predicament. In order to fully exist as individuals we need the fiction of a Big Other. There must be an agency which, as it were, registers our predicament, an agency where the truth of ourselves will be inscribed, accepted, an agency to which to confess.

But what if there is no such agency? This was the utmost despair of many women raped in the post-Yugoslav war in Bosnia in the early 1990s. They survived a terrible predicament and what kept them alive was the idea ‘I must survive to tell the truth’. If when if they survived they made a terrible discovery, there is no one to really listen to them. Either some ignorant bored social worker or some relative who usually made obscene insinuations like are you sure you were not even enjoying a little bit the rape and so on and so on. They discovered the truth of what Jacques Lacan claims: there is no Big Other. There may be a virtual Big Other to whom you cannot confess. There may be a real other but it’s never the virtual one. We are alone.

I think Kafka was right when he said that for a modern secular non-religious man bureaucracy, state bureaucracy, is the only remaining contact with the dimension of the divine. It is in this scene from Brazil that we see the intimate link between bureaucracy and enjoyment. What the impenetrable omnipotence of bureaucracy harbours is divine enjoyment.

The intense rush of bureaucratic engagement serves nothing. It is the performance of it’s very purposelessness that generates an intense enjoyment ready to reproduce itself forever.

The adverse of that is a wonderful scene more towards the beginning of the film.

The hero who has a problem in his apartment with plumbing tries to get the State agency to fix it.

Of course, two guys come, they just want forms to fill in, they do nothing.

And then the ultimate subversive figure comes; a kind of clandestine plumber comes, played by Robert De Niro…

Who tells him ‘just tell me what is the problem’ and promise quickly to fix it. This of course is the ultimate offense to bureaucracy.