We should be here very precise not to fall into the usual trap of disqualifying all elements out of which the Nazi ideological edifice is composed, to disqualify all of them as proto-fascist. We should never forget that the large majority if these elements which we today associate with fascism were taken from the worker’s movement. This idea of large numbers of people marching together, this idea of strict bodily discipline as our duty. The Nazis directly took this over from social democracy, from the left.

Let me just take some other central concepts of the Nazi worldview: the solidarity of the people. My God there is nothing bad in this notion as such. The problem is solidarity to what kind of people? If by people you mean Volksgemeinschaft, the organic community of people where then the enemy is automatically the foreign intruder, in this case we are in Nazism.

The crucial thing is to locate ideology where it belongs. Let’s take a clear example. The well known song ‘Tomorrow Belongs To Me’ from the film Cabaret.

Some of my friends after seeing the film, Bob Fosse’s Cabaret, thought that after they heard this song they finally understood what at it’s deepest emotional impact, what fascism is.

But I think this precisely is the mistake to be avoided. This song is rather ordinary popular song. Incidentally, it was composed while they were shooting the movie by a Jewish couple. Nice irony. If you look not only at the music, at the way it is sung, but even at the words:

One can well imagine with a slight change of words radically leftist, communist song.

The German hard rock band Rammstein are often accused of flirting, playing with the Nazi iconography. But if one observes closely their show, one can see very nicely what they are doing. Exemplarily in one of their best known songs ‘Reise Reise.’

The minimal elements of the Nazi ideology enacted by Rammstein are something like pure elements of libidinal investment. Enjoyment has to be, as it were, condensed in some minimal tics: gestures, which do not have any precise ideological meaning. What Rammstein does is it liberates these elements from their Nazi articulations. It allows us to enjoy them in their pre-ideological state.

The way to fight Nazism is to enjoy these elements, ridiculous as they may appear, by suspending the Nazi horizon of meaning. This way you undermine Nazism from within.

So how does nonetheless ideology do this? How does it articulate pre-ideological elements? These elements can also be seen as a kind of a bribe. The way ideology pays us to seduce us into its edifice. These bribes can be purely libidinal bribes, all those tics which are condensed enjoyment. Or, they can be explicit discursive elements like notions of solidarity of collective discipline, struggle for one’s destiny and so on and so on. All these in itself are free floating elements which open themselves to different ideological fields.

Let’s turn to the high point of our consumerism.

Let me take a drink. Some of it… Starbucks coffee. I am regularly drinking it, I must admit it. But are we aware that when we buy a cappuccino from Starbucks, we also buy quite a lot of ideology. Which ideology? You know when you enter a Starbucks store, it’s usually always displayed in some posters there, their message which is: ‘Yes our cappuccino is more expensive than the others but,’ and then comes the story, ‘we give one percent of all our income to some Guatemala children to keep them healthy. For the water supply for some Sahara farmers, or to save the forests, enable organic growing coffee, whatever, whatever.’

Now I admire the ingeniosity of this solution. In the old days of pure simple consumerism you bought a product and then you felt bad. ‘My God, I’m just a consumerist while people are starving in Africa.’

So the idea was you had to do something to counteract your pure distractive consumerism. For example, I don’t know, you contribute to charity and so on. What Starbucks enables you is to be a consumerist and… be a consumerist without any bad conscience because the price for the counter measure, for fighting consumerism is already included into the price of a commodity. Like, you pay a little bit more and you are not just a consumerist but you do also your duty towards environment, the poor starving people in Africa and so on and so on. It’s, I think, the ultimate form of consumerism.

We should not simply oppose a principal life dedicated to beauty and enjoying our small pleasures. Let’s take today’s capitalism. We have, on the one hand, the demands of the circulation of the capital which push us towards profit making, expansion, exploitation and destruction of nature and, on the other hand, ecological demands. ‘Let’s think about our posterity and about our own survival, let’s take care of nature and so on.’

In this opposition between ruthless pursuit of capitalist expansion and ecological awareness duty, a strange perverted duty of course, duty is on the side of capitalism, as many prestigious analysts have noted. Capitalism has a strange religious structure. It is propelled by this absolute demand: capital has to circulate to reproduce itself to expand, to multiply itself and for this goal anything can be sacrifices, up to our lives, up to nature and so on. Here we have a strange unconditional injunction. A true capitalist is a miser who is ready to sacrifice everything for this perverted duty.

What we see here in Mojave Desert at resting place for abandoned planes is the other side of capitalist dynamics. Capitalism is all the time in crisis. This is precisely why it appears almost indestructible. Crisis is not its obstacle. It is what pushes it forwards towards self-revolutionising permanent, extended self-reproduction – always new products. The other invisible side of it is waste, tremendous amount of waste.