Consequently, the basic matrix of interpassivity follows from the very notion of subject as the pure activity of (self)positing, as the fluidity of pure Becoming, devoid of any positive, firm Being: if I am to function as pure activity, I have to externalize my (passive) Being—in short, I have to be passive through another. This inert object that “is” my Being, in which my inert Being is externalized, is the Lacanian objet petit a. Insofar as the elementary, constitutive structure of subjectivity is hysterical, in other words, insofar as hysteria is defined by the question “What am I for an object (in the eyes of the Other, for the Other’s desire)?”, it confronts us with interpassivity at its purest. What hysterical subjects are unable to accept, what gives rise to an unbearable anxiety in them, is the presentiment that the Other(s) perceive them in the passivity of their Being, as objects to be exchanged, enjoyed, or otherwise “manipulated”. Therein lies the “ontological axiom” of Lacanian subjectivity: the more I am active, the more I must be passive at another place, the more there must be another object that is passive in my place, on my behalf. (This axiom is realized in its utmost simplicity with the proverbial senior manager who, from time to time, feels compelled to visit prostitutes in order to be exposed to masochist rituals and “treated as a mere object”.) The theoretical problem that arises here is the one formulated long ago by Adorno (and to which he proposed his solution of Angstlose Passivitaet, “passivity without anxiety”): is it possible for the subject to be passive toward the domain of objects, to acknowledge the “primacy of the object,” without falling prey to fetishism?  In Lacanian terms, the same problem may be reformulated as: does objet petit a always and necessarily function as a fetishist object, as the object whose fascinating presence covers up the lack of castration (the small a over minus phi of castration, in Lacan’s mathemes)?

Crucial here is the reflective reversal of “the Other does it for me, instead of me, in my place”, into “I myself am doing it through the Other”. This reversal renders the minimal condition of subjectivity: the attitude that constitutes subjectivity is not “I am the active autonomous agent who is doing it”, but “when another is doing it for me, I myself am doing it through him/her” (a woman who is doing it through her man, etc.). This reversal is repeatedly at work in the Hegelian dialectical process, in the guise of the reversal of determining reflection into reflective determination. As is known, determining reflection is the dialectical unity of positing and external reflection. On the level of the subject’s activity, “positing reflection” occurs when I am directly active; in “external reflection”, the Other is active and I merely observe it passively. When the Other does it for me, instead of me, acting as my proxy, my relationship toward him or her becomes that of determining reflection—external and positing reflection already overlap in it (the very act of observing the Other doing it for me, the moment of external reflection, makes me aware that he or she is doing it for me, that, in this sense, I myself “posited” that person’s activity, that it is “mediated” by my subjective position); it is only when I posit direct identity between the Other’s activity and my own when I conceive of myself as the truly active party, as the one who is doing it through the Other, that we pass from determining reflection to reflective determination (since, on this level, the Other’ activity is not only determined by my reflection, but directly posited as my reflective determination). Or, to refer again to the Yugoslav joke, we are dealing here with the shift from “representatives of the people who drive limousines in the place of the ordinary people” to “ordinary people themselves who drive limousines through their representatives”. In the domain of jouissance, this is a shift from the Other enjoying it instead of me, in my place, to myself enjoying it through the Other.

This paradox also allows us to throw some new light on sexual difference. When, at the outset of his argumentation for distributive justice, John Rawls states that his hypothesis excludes the presence of envy in rational subjects, he thereby excludes desire itself in its constitutive mediation with the Other’s desire. However, the logic of “envy” is not the same for both sexes. How then does “desire is the desire of the Other” differ in the case of men and women? The masculine version is, to put it simply, that of competition/envy: “I want it because you want it, insofar as you want it.” In other words, what confers the value of desirability on an object is that it is already desired by another. The aim here is the ultimate destruction of the Other, which, of course, then renders the object worthless—and therein resides the paradox of the male dialectic of desire. The feminine version, on the contrary, is that of “I desire through the Other,” in the sense of “let the Other do it (possess and enjoy the object, etc.) for me” (let my husband, my son, succeed for me), as well as “I only desire what he desires, I only want to fulfill his desire” (Antigone who only wants to fulfill the desire of the Other in accomplishing the proper burial of her brother).

The thesis that a man tends to act directly and to assume his act, while a woman prefers to act by proxy, letting another (or manipulating another into) doing it for her, may sound like the worst cliché, which gives rise to the notorious image of the woman as a natural schemer hiding behind the man’s back.  But what if this cliché nevertheless points toward the feminine status of the subject? What if the “original” subjective gesture, the gesture constitutive of subjectivity, is not that of autonomously “doing something”, but rather that of the primordial substitution, of withdrawing and letting another do it for me, in my place? Women, much more than men, are able to enjoy by proxy, to find deep satisfaction in the awareness that their beloved partner enjoys (or succeeds or in any other way has attained his or her goal).  In this precise sense, the Hegelian “cunning of reason” bears witness to the resolutely feminine nature of what Hegel calls “Reason”: “Look for the hidden Reason (which realizes itself in the apparent confusion of egotistic direct motifs and acts)!” is Hegel’s version of the notorious Cherchez la femme! This, then, is how reference to interpassivity allows us to complicate the standard opposition of man versus woman as active versus passive, for sexual difference is inscribed in the very core of the relationship of substitution-woman can remain passive while being active through her Other, man can be active while suffering through his Other.

The ontological paradox, if not scandal, of these phenomena (whose psychoanalytic name, of course, is fantasy) resides in the fact that they subvert the standard opposition of “subjective” and “objective”. Of course, fantasy is by definition not “objective” (in the naive sense of “existing independently of the subject’s perceptions); however, it is also not “subjective” (in the sense of being reducible to the subject’s consciously experienced intuitions). Rather, fantasy belongs to the “bizarre category of the objectively subjective—the way things actually, objectively seem to you even if they don’t seem that way to you”.  When, for example, the subject actually experiences a series of fantasmatic formations that interrelate as so many permutations of each other, this series is never complete: it is always as if the actually experienced series presents so many variations of some underlying “fundamental” fantasy that is never actually experienced by the subject. (In Freud’s “A Child Is Being Beaten”, the two consciously experienced fantasies presuppose and thus relate to a third one, “My father is beating me”, which was never actually experienced and can only be retroactively reconstructed as the presupposed reference of—or, in this case, the intermediate term between—the other two fantasies.) We can even go further and claim that, in this sense, the Freudian unconscious itself is “objectively subjective”: when, for example, we claim that people who are consciously well disposed toward Jews nonetheless harbor profound anti-Semitic prejudices they are not consciously aware of, do we not claim that (insofar as these prejudices do not render the way Jews really are, but the way they appear to such people) they are not aware of how Jews really seem to him?