This reversal of the “normal” order has clear theological connotations: in true religion, I first believe in God and then, on the basis of my belief, become susceptible to the proofs of the truth of my faith. Here too, Columbo first knows, with a mysterious, but nonetheless absolutely infallible certainty, who did it, and then, on the basis of this inexplicable knowledge, proceeds to gather proofs. And, in a slightly different way, this is what the analyst qua “subject supposed to know” is about: when the analysand enters into a transferential relationship with the analyst, he has the same absolute certainty that the analyst knows his secret (which only means that the patient is a priori “guilty,” that there is a secret meaning to be drawn from his acts). Analysts are thus not empiricists, probing their patients with different hypotheses, searching for proofs, and so on; they embody the absolute certainty (which Lacan compares with the certainty of Descartes’ cogito ergo sum) of the analysands’ “guilt,” namely their unconscious desire.

The two notions, that of the subject supposed to believe and that of the subject supposed to know, are not symmetrical because belief and knowledge themselves are not symmetrical. At its most radical, the status of the (Lacanian) big Other qua symbolic institution is that of belief (trust), not that of knowledge, since belief is symbolic and knowledge is real (the big Other involves, and relies on a fundamental “trust”).  Belief is always minimally “reflective”, a “belief in the belief of the other” (“I still believe in Communism” is the equivalent of saying “I believe there are still people who believe in Communism”), while knowledge is precisely not knowledge about the fact that there is another who knows.  For this reason, I can BELIEVE through the other, but I cannot KNOW through the other. That is to say, owing to the inherent reflectivity of belief, when another believes in my place, I myself believe through him, but knowledge is not reflective in the same way: when the other is supposed to know, I do not know through him.

According to a well-known anthropological anecdote, the “primitives” to whom certain “superstitious beliefs” were attributed, when directly asked about them, answered that “some people believe”, immediately displacing their belief, transferring it onto another. And again, are we not doing the same with our children: we go through the ritual of Santa Claus, since our children (are supposed to) believe in it and we do not want to disappoint them. Is this not also the typical excuse of the mythical crooked or cynical politician who turns honest? “I cannot disappoint them [the mythical “ordinary people”] who believe in it (or in me).” And, furthermore, isn’t this need to find another who “really believes” also that which propels us in our need to stigmatize the Other as a (religious or ethnic) “fundamentalist”? In an uncanny way, belief always seems to function in the guise of such a “belief at a distance”: in order for the belief to function, there has to be some ultimate guarantor of it, yet this guarantor is always deferred, displaced, never present in persona. How, then, is belief possible? How is this vicious cycle of deferred belief cut short? The point, of course, is that the subject who directly believes need not exist for the belief to be operative. It suffices to presuppose its existence—to believe in it, in the guise of either the mythological founding figure who is not part of our experiential reality, or the impersonal “one” (“one believes”). The crucial mistake to be avoided here is, again, the properly “humanist” notion that this belief embodied in things, displaced onto things, is nothing but a reified form of a direct human belief, in which case the task of the phenomenological reconstitution of the genesis of “reification” would be to demonstrate how the original human belief was transposed onto things. The paradox to be maintained, in contrast to such attempts at phenomenological genesis, is that displacement is original and constitutive: there is no immediate, self-present living subjectivity to whom the belief embodied in “social things” can be attributed and who is then dispossessed of it. Je sais bien, mais quand même… / I believe: therein resides the dilemma—either we play the Jungian obscurantist game of “let’s not focus on our superficial rational knowledge; let’s embrace the profound archetypal beliefs that form the foundation of our being”, or we embark on a difficult road to give an account of these beliefs in knowledge. Kierkegaard already rendered the ultimate paradox of belief: he emphasized that the apostle preaches the need to believe and asks that we accept his belief upon his word; he never offers “hard proofs” destined to convince nonbelievers. For this reason, the reluctance of the Church to confront evidence that may prove or disprove its claims is more ambiguous than it may appear. In the case of the Turin shroud, which allegedly bears the contours of the crucified Jesus, and thus his almost photographic portrait, it is too simple to read the Church’s reluctance as expressing the fear that the shroud will turn out to be a fake from a later period. Perhaps it would be even more horrifying if the shroud were proven to be authentic, since this positivist “verification” of the belief would undermine its status and deprive it of its charisma. Belief can only thrive in the shadowy domain between outright falsity and positive truth. The Jansenists’ notion of a miracle bears witness to the fact that they were fully aware of this paradox. For them, a miracle is an event that has the quality of a miracle only in the eyes of the believer—to the commonsense eyes of an infidel, it appears as a purely natural coincidence. Thus, the miracle is inherently linked to the fact of belief—there is no neutral miracle to convince cynical infidels. Or, to put it in another way, the fact that the miracle appears as such only to believers is a sign of God’s power, not of His impotence.

This relationship of substitution is not limited to beliefs: the same goes for every one of the subject’s innermost feelings and attitudes, including crying and laughing. Suffice it to recall the timeless enigma of transposed/displaced emotions, from the so-called “weepers” (women hired to cry at funerals) in “primitive” societies to the “canned laughter” on a TV screen to the screen persona adopted in cyberspace. When I construct a “false” image that stands for me in a virtual community (in sexual games, for example, a shy man often assumes the screen persona of an attractive, promiscuous woman), the emotions I feel and “feign” as part of my screen persona are not simply false : although (what I experience as) my “true self” does not feel them, they are nonetheless in a sense “true”, just as with watching a TV mini-series with canned laughter, where, even if I do not laugh but simply stare at the screen, tired after a hard day’s work, I nonetheless feel relieved after the show. This is what the Lacanian notion of “decenterment”, the decentered subject, is aimed at : my most intimate feelings can be radically externalized; I can literally “laugh and cry through another”.