Question: I am very interested in this notion of the authentic act. Is this something that is always possible or do we have to take into account historical limitations? We have here in Saas-Fee a companion program in expressive arts therapy — so I’m interested specifically in what the consequences would be for therapy and for the arts.

Zizek: The consequences for therapy are pretty obvious and hopefully you don’t reach the point where you teach your patients to really kill their children, but that without making a substantial risk in a leap which isn’t not covered in advance by any rules but reconstitutes your subjectivity there is no true therapy. For me this is Kierkegaard against Socrates, at least a particular version of Socrates, being simply “deep within you there is an inner core which waits to be liberated and you just have to open yourself to it.” You must have this moment, I am almost tempted to say, of transubstantiation. In the sense that I am “newly born”. Not “newly born” in any directly religious sense, but in the sense that I am substantially no longer the same person. Without this leap you don’t have true therapy. In this sense, I claim an act, of course, is not something that can be accommodated into an image of deterministic materialism, because it’s something that comes ex nihilo.

I’ll put it in this way. Hegel used often the term “positing the very presuppositions”. Let me take my favorite example from religion which every true Christian, which I unfortunately am not, would tell you. As Kierkegaard posits, if you say: “I looked around and Christianity convinced me with its reasons. So since I was convinced by Christian arguments, I believe in Christianity”, this is an obscenity. It works the other way around. You must believe in order to understand the reasons. This is why for me falling in love is also an act, because you cannot say: “I fell in love with you because of these features.” It is also always in this other direction: “Yes, I did fall in love with you in account of some features, but in order for me to properly recognize these features, I must already be in love with you.” This retroactivity is always at work in an act.

Or to go into an ethical problematic, this is what Kant aims for in his radical ethical stance. So what is the meaning of “du kannst, denn du sollst”? My point is that you cannot simply evoke external circumstances such as “Ok, I would like to do my duty, but unfortunately I can’t do it.” My point is that the very recognition of circumstances is never simply neutral, especially if there are so-called inner circumstances. This is when you say: “Oh, I would like to do my duty, but I can’t help it.” For example I would like to abstain from sex, but I cannot help it, my sexual longing is too strong, so I cannot resist the temptation. Kant’s point is that the very act of acknowledging something as a temptation which you cannot resist is already your free choice. In this sense you posit the very presupposition. However, I claim that in an even deeper sense, Kant’s ethics involves a more radical feature which is extremely interesting ethically and extremely actual today. I claim that at its most radical, Kant’s ethics of autonomy does not mean that the categorical imperative is a kind of neutral black box machine. For example, somebody tells me: “That is your duty.” Is it or not, I don’t know, so I put it in the test of the categorical imperative: If it survives the test, than that is what I should do. I claim that it is rather the following: That the message of Kantian autonomy is that not only you cannot use your pathological longings as an excuse why you can’t do your duty, for example you cannot say “This is my duty but I will not do it because it may hurt my friend”, you also cannot use duty itself as an excuse to do your duty. You cannot say to your friend: “Listen, I must drop you now because it is my ethical duty. I know it hurts you but this is my duty.” Because in this way you already objectify yourself, it is not you. Kant means that duty itself is not an excuse to do your duty. You are fully responsible to formulate what your duty is. This is how I read the categorical imperative — it has the structure of what Kant calls aesthetic judgment. Lyotard developed this very nicely: An aesthetic judgment is not simply an application of pre-existing norms to the situation, in the aesthetic judgment you posit the norms yourself and it is your responsibility. Apropos of a particular situation, you have to reinvent the universality which covers the situation, and as such you are fully responsible for it. When you say: “That is my duty”, you cannot say: “What can I do, it’s my duty.” You fully have to stand behind what your duty is.

Now, going back to the materiality of the act. Of course, this definition of the authentic act has an aspect of being almost non-historical, I agree with that. But believe me I am an old-fashioned Marxist, so what I claim is that this notion of act is of special actuality today in our so-called post-modern era, where the predominant ethic, across the entire spectrum of ethical positions, from narcissistic hedonism to neo-fundamentalism or whatever, is an ethic precisely against the ethical act. All these problems of ethical committees, of ethical rules, are always about how to prevent an excess which is precisely the excess of the act. In this sense I claim that it is only today, in today’s so-called permissive society, that society is regulated as no society in history ever was, that such notion of an act was ever elaborated.