Private Joker. why don’t you join my beloved corps?

I think that the drill sergeant, the way it is played in an exemplary way in Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket, that the drill sergeant is rather a tragic figure.

I always like to imagine him as the person who after his work returns home is quite decent and so on.

All this obscene shouting is just a show put on, not so much to impress ordinary soldiers whom he is training, as to bribe them with bits of enjoyment. It’s not just a question of these obscenities, which sustains the military machinery; it’s another more general rule which holds for military communities but even more, I would say, for all human communities. From the largest nations, ethnic groups, up to small university departments and so on. You don’t only have explicit rules. You always, in order to become part of a community, you need some implicit unwritten rules, which are never publicly recognised but are absolutely crucial as the point of the identification of a group.

In the U.K. everyone knows about the obscene unwritten rituals, which regulate life in public schools.

Just think about Lindsay Anderson’s classic If. The public life is democratic, we have professor which interact with their pupils, nice atmosphere, teaching, friendship, spirit of cooperation but then we all know what happens beneath the surface. Older pupils torturing, sexual abusing the younger. This same mixture of obscenity and sadistic violence. And again, what is crucial here is we should not simply put all the blame or all the enjoyment on the older pupils. The victims even are part of this infernal cycle of obscenity. It is as if in order to really be a member of a community you have to render your hands dirty.

And I think even the Abu Ghraib scandal of American soldiers torturing or especially humiliating Iraqi prisoners is to be read in this way. It’s not simply we the arrogant Americans are humiliating others. What Iraqi soldiers experienced there was the staging of the obscene underside of the American military culture.

In Full Metal Jacket it’s the character of Joker played by Matthew Modine who is close to what we would call a normal soldier – a M.A.S.H. type of soldier. He has proper ironic distance. He proves, at the end, militarily, the most efficient soldier.

Returning back to me. Why then will I soon shoot myself. Something went wrong there. But what?

I did not just run amuck.

But I got too directly identified with this obscene rituals. I lost the distance. I took them seriously.

If you get too close to it, if you over identify with it, if you really immediately become the voice of this super ego it’s self destructive. You kill people around you, you end up killing yourself.

So who is Joker?

Which is the lie he is opposing?

The truly disturbing thing about The Dark Knight is that it elevates lie into a general social principal, into the principal of organisation of our social political life. As if our societies can remain stable, can function, only if based on a lie. As if telling the truth, and this telling the truth is embodies in Joker means distraction. Disintegration of the social order.

Toward the end it is as if lie functions as a hot potato passing from one person’s hand to another person’s hand. First there is Harvey Dent… the public prosecutor who lies claiming that he is the real person behind Batman’s mask. That he is Batman. Then we have got honest policeman, Batman’s friend, who fakes, stages his own death.

At the end, Batman himself takes upon himself…

…in order to maintain the trust of the public into the legal system. The idea is if the ordinary public were to learn how corrupt was, or is, the very core of our legal system then everything would have collapsed so we need a lie to maintain order.

There’s nothing new in this. This is an old conservative wisdom asserted long ago by philosophers from Plato, but especially and then, Emmanuel Kant, Edmond Burke and so on and so on. This idea that the truth is too strong. That a politician should be a cynicist who although he knows what is true, tells to ordinary people what Plato called a ‘noble fable’, a lie.