The Western liberal academic’s obsession with the suffering in Bosnia might be taken as the outstanding recent example of interpassive suffering. One can authentically suffer through reports on rapes and mass killings in Bosnia while calmly pursuing one’s academic career. Another standard example of interpassivity is provided by the role of the “madman” within a pathologically distorted intersubjective link (for example, a family whose repressed traumas explode in the mental breakdown of one of its members): when a group produces a madman, do they not shift upon him the necessity of passively enduring the suffering that belongs to all of them? Is the ultimate example of interpassivity not the “absolute example” (Hegel) itself, that of Christ who took upon himself the (deserved) suffering of humanity? Christ redeemed us all not by acting for us, but by assuming the burden of the ultimate passive experience. (The difference between activity and passivity, of course, is often blurred: weeping as an act of public mourning is not simply passive; it is passivity transformed into an active, ritualized, symbolic practice.)

In the political domain, one of the recent outstanding examples of “interpassivity” is the multiculturalist Left intellectual’s “apprehension” about how even the Muslims, the great victims of the Yugoslav war, are now renouncing the multi-ethnic, pluralist vision of Bosnia and conceding to the fact that, if Serbs and Croats want their clearly defined ethnic units, they too want an ethnic space of their own. This Leftist’s “regret” is multiculturalist racism at its worst, as if Bosnians were not literally pushed into creating their own ethnic enclave by the way that the “liberal” West has treated them in the last five years. However, what interests us here is how the “multi-ethnic Bosnia” is only the latest in the series of mythical figures of the Other through which Western Leftist intellectuals have acted out their ideological fantasies: these intellectuals are “multi-ethnic” through Bosnians, break out of the Cartesian paradigm by admiring Native American wisdom, and so on, in the same way that, in past decades, when they were revolutionaries by admiring Cuba, or “democratic socialists” by endorsing the myth of Yugoslav “self-management” socialist as “something special,” a genuine democratic breakthrough. In all of these cases, they have continued to lead their undisturbed upper-middle-class academic existence, while doing their progressive duty through the Other. This paradox of interpassivity, of believing or enjoying through the other, also opens up a new approach to aggressivity: what sets aggressivity in motion in a subject is that the other subject, through which the first believed or enjoyed, does something that disturbs the functioning of this transference. See, for example, the attitude of some Western Leftist academics toward the disintegration of Yugoslavia: since the fact that the people of ex-Yugoslavia rejected (“betrayed”) Socialism disturbed the belief of these academics (i.e., prevented them from persisting in their belief in “authentic” self-management socialism through the Other that realizes it), everyone who does not share their Yugo-nostalgic attitude was dismissed as a proto-Fascist nationalist.

Are we not, however, confusing different phenomena under the same title of interpassivity? Is there not a crucial distinction between the Other taking over from me the “dull” mechanical aspect of routine duties, and the Other taking over from me and thus depriving me of enjoyment? Is “to be relieved of one’s enjoyment” not a meaningless paradox, at best a euphemism for simply being deprived of it? Is enjoyment not something that, precisely, cannot be done through the Other? One can already offer a response on the level of elementary psychological observation by recalling the deep satisfaction a subject (a parent, for example) can obtain from the awareness that his or her beloved daughter or son is really enjoying something; a loving parent can literally enjoy through the Other’s enjoyment. However, there is a much more uncanny phenomenon at work here: the only real way to account for the satisfaction and liberating potential of being able to enjoy through the Other (i.e., of being relieved of one’s enjoyment and displacing it onto the Other) is to accept that enjoyment itself is not an immediate, spontaneous state but is sustained by a superego-imperative: as Lacan emphasized again and again, the ultimate content of the superego-injunction is “Enjoy!”

In order to grasp this paradox properly, one must first elucidate the opposition between the (public symbolic) Law and the superego. The public Law “between the lines” silently tolerates, incites even, what its explicit text prohibits (adultery, for example), while the superego injunction that ordains jouissance, through the very directness of its order, hinders the subject’s access to it much more effectively than any prohibition. Let us consider the figure of the father who advises his son on sexual exploits: if the father warns him against them, formally prohibits him from dating girls, between the lines he only propels the son to do so, (i.e., to find satisfaction in violating the paternal prohibition). If, on the contrary, the father obscenely pushes him to “behave like a man” and seduce girls, the actual effect of this will probably be the opposite (the son’s withdrawal, shame of the obscene father, even impotence). Perhaps the briefest way to render the superego paradox is the injunction “Like it or not, enjoy yourself !” Suffice it to recall a father who works hard to organize a family holiday and, after a series of postponements, tired of it all, shouts at his children: “Now you’d better enjoy it !” On a holiday trip, it is quite common to feel a superego compulsion to enjoy: one “must have fun”, and one feels guilty if one doesn’t enjoy it. (In the Eisenhower era of the “happy 50s”, this compulsion was elevated to an everyday patriotic duty, or, as one of the public ideologues put it: “Not to be happy today is un-American.”)