They will have to invent something. I don’t believe they will, for structural reasons, that they will be able to rejoin the West, become another prosperous liberal democracy. Either they will become some kind of half-nationalist closed authoritarian regime, or they will have to invent something new – not because they have a specific Russian genius, but they will be compelled to do it.

Question: [inaudible] how can you make the universal more concrete [inaudible]

Zizek: I can answer you, please, very precisely. First, apropos of Yugoslavia: What I don’t agree with is the standard narrative which presents Germany and Austria as the bad guys who wanted to reassert their interests in Croatia, in Slovenia, and that’s the reason why they supported the breakup of Yugoslavia. That’s a simplistic narrative that I don’t buy.

I claim that basically, until ’92, ’93, the American politics was definitely pro-Yugoslav, against the “secessionist” republics. Do you know that until ’92 I had to travel abroad with Yugoslav passport? So when they say Slovenia was recognized too early, no it wasn’t, precisely it wasn’t recognized. For one year-and-a-half I was living in a nonentity; that is to say, I traveled around with a Yugoslav passport, although formally we were independent.

So what I claim is that, if you want my answer to this question, first, the one big promise of American politics, the unfortunate one, is they’re always trying to isolate in some region the strongest agent, and then they claim that only the stability of that agent can guarantee the stability of the entire area. Which is why I claim almost the obsession of the American politics in the early ’90s was to say we must find a way out of the Yugoslav crisis without humiliating the Serbs too much. The idea was we cannot bypass Milosevic. This was the key to their politics there. So it’s a more complex question. In what way. It’s the same complexity as the one that I briefly improvised, you remember, apropos of Chechnya today. I wonder, why isn’t it more written about this? My sources for what I said were not some so-called dismissed-by-the-large-media crazy leftist small-circulation papers; I read this in the main German dailies, what I said. Every idiot knows this in Europe, that what it really is about, this sudden war in Chechnya is that you know in Azerbaijan the oil reserves are at the level of the combined Arab reserves. This is what is actually behind this war. I’m not saying that this explains anything.

About concrete universality, that’s a very good point. Precisely concrete universality means for me the following thing: When you have a certain universality, asserted this universality – and here to answer you would be my Marxism – you have always to ask what questions are not asked in order for this universality to assert itself. This is where I find problematic this multiculturalist talk of thriving multiple identities, and so on and so on. It’s very nice to hear these stories about how – and this is the great merit of the so-called post-modern politics, that a multitude of new spheres were repoliticized. We discovered how sex relations how politicized, ecology, and so on and so on. But nonetheless, what worries me is that certain – at least in the predominant version of it – certain questions are no longer asked. Like nobody questions global capitalism, and so on and so on, and this is what I find problematic in this poetry of, you know, multiple new political identities. Yes, but in order to this multiplicity, some questions are no longer asked. And this is my problem with this new discourse on human rights, that it is part of a precisely concrete universality of a situation where certain questions are no longer permitted to be asked.

And I can even concretely tell you how. This is the reason I am skeptical about so-called modern liberal politics. Did you notice how the very same people who are deep into this poetry of human rights, the moment you propose a certain political measure which is a little bit utopian or radical, they use a kind of a totalitarian blackmail. They claim, “But didn’t we learn the lesson [that] this necessarily ends up in a new form of totalitarianism?” That is to say, the political message of the very people who go into this depoliticized poetry of human rights is to denounce every radical political measure as potentially totalitarian.

So what I would like is such a discourse of human rights which will not have this dimension of dismissing in advance any radical gesture as potentially totalitarian whatsoever. This is, again, what I find problematic in this neo-liberal discourse. We really have something that in comparison with the – You know, in Germany they spoke in the ’70s as a reaction to so-called terrorism, of Berufsverbot, the prohibition to employ radicals. Today I claim we have a kind of a Denkverbot, prohibition to think. We are literally prohibited by liberals to think – I mean predominantly in the media – to think a little bit more radically because immediately they then raise this threat. But do you know that ultimately what you are claiming? I remember once when I just made a suggestion that maybe some new measures will be necessary which will break this liberal consensus, the immediate explosion was, “But what do you want? Do you want gulag again?” This immediate equation – any radical political action means either total chaos or gulag – this for me is the problem of concrete universality today.

This is where, I think, at a different level maybe – I hope not too different – you share the same concern when we spoke. This is for me the problem of how to redefine socialism today, how to break out of this multiculturalist problematic, not because it is false, but because precisely it generates, because the way it operates it leaves the space open for this economic province to be reappropriated in a false racist way by the new populist right. Here I see the problem, at least I think. Although, again, it’s easy to say here; it’s difficult to do it, I know well.