Question: Depression seems to be current pathological form of this historical epoch, everybody’s on Prozac, right? I think that connects to why we are anaesthetized against the act and depoliticized. I have never lived in such an apolitical epoch, being a child of the sixties. Could you comment on that idea of what depression might be — does the act really mean killing, I mean symbolically killing your children, or why are we not taking radical authentic steps in this culture…

Zizek: The way I would put it is the following. First let me answer the last question to disperse any ambiguity that I am preaching child-killing or whatever. Although incidentally if there is an entity which fits perfectly the Kantian notion of radical evil these are children between the ages of 4 and 5. But that is another story. The point I’m trying to make about “child-killing” is for when you are caught in a certain debilitating situation where power doesn’t work as a simple external repression which you just throw off and liberate yourself from. If you simplify it somewhat, power manipulates your psychic needs of perverse satisfaction. What I was aiming at is that in order to properly be able to oppose the power you must sacrifice that innermost part of yourself, your mode of enjoyment by means of which you were attached to power. Marcuse, in the old terms of the sixties, said that in order to achieve social liberation we must first liberate ourselves from the inner hold of consumer society. Liberation is not simply here that I feel my substantial identity threatened by external power and so I oppose it. No, you must sacrifice part of yourself. This can be very hard. Only in this way can you construct the terrain for opposing, embodied in an extreme example by Toni Morrison’s heroine in “Beloved”. Without this gesture you do not have the space to act freely, or to even oppose effectively.

Question: Maybe depression comes from that deadlock.

Zizek: I’m tempted to enter the problematic of depression, but I’m not a pure clinician because I like to travel. And the idea for me to stay in one place… I’ve also noticed that the patients talk — I like to talk as you’ve noticed and there is something in my nature which resists the idea of listening to other people talk for hours. But nonetheless from what I know from my clinician friends about depression is that the description of depression often partially overlaps with the description of melancholia. It’s often said that we live in a post-political society of melancholia and so on — I think we should never forget that in psychoanalysis the definition of melancholia is a very precise one. It is not simply that the melancholic has lost the object. If you read Freud really closely it is almost the opposite, it is that you get the object but you lose the desire for the object. Freud hit it when he claimed precisely that the melancholic complains of losing an object but he is not aware of what feature it is that he lost, he is confused between the object of desire and that which makes me desire the object. The way I read it, the whole point of psychoanalysis is that desire is mediated. It is never: “I like strawberry cake.” Ok, maybe you do but that’s another story. The point is that I like the cake because for example I know that another person that I love likes it and I want to impress them. Desire is in a sense always intersubjective, it is never simply me and the object. The suffocating aspect of the melancholia which then leads to depression is that today the more we are bombarded with objects, the less, in this over-presence of objects, is the cause of our desire — what makes us desire the object is lost. It is a different dynamic which is probably part of the paradox of permissivity.

So I definitely agree with you that what is going on today is a quite serious phenomenon in that perhaps the very fundamental matrix of socialization, of entering the social symbolic order, is somehow changing. My problem with theories such as the so-called “reflexive society” as described by Ulrich Beck and Anthony Giddens, these two court philosophers, is that they paint a little bit too bright of a picture. On a sociological level, for them all these problems like depression are simply that we are not fully ready to take the openness, to assume the risk, the lack of support of postmodern society. It’s not that simple but nonetheless there is basically a fundamental optimism. The problem I have with people like Beck is that both qualitatively and quantitatively they underestimate how this so-much praised “reflexive society”, or “second modernity” produces its own immediacy, its own non-reflexivity. Referring to psychiatric practice I’ll give my favorite example, which is for me the horror of reflexivity — this is how symptoms themselves in psychoanalysis are becoming more and more reflexive. You no longer get, as in the good old days, naive patients who come to you and say: “Last night I dreamt about going through a thick wood, killing a dragon, and entering a castle.” And you say: “Yes, yes, the dragon is your father. You kill him to enter the maternal castle.” No, today you have patients who already know about theory and who theorize, and even sometimes their symptoms themselves have the structure of a theory… you have Lacanian symptoms, Anna Freudian symptoms. The paradox of this is that the interpretation is losing its efficiency. The patient himself comes to you and tells you : “I am an obsessional-neurotic.” Like I am obviously. “That is why I have this trauma.” He gives you a perfect explanation and then he nicely continues to be an obsessional neurotic. It’s the same as my favorite example from politics, with neo-Nazi skinheads. I listen to some of them on the TV and they tell you, “Yes, I know I am like that. I am beating Turks and foreigners because in my youth I lacked proper maternal care. I lacked paternal authority.” And they give you a nice explanation and then they do it. So the other aspect of this global reflexivity is an emergence of a new stupid immediacy which no reflection can help. It’s within this constellation that phenomena like depression should be positioned.