Wait a minute, am I totally crazy? The only way to commit an act is to kill your children? You could also accuse me that this is a typically male logic. Women would be more attached to their substantial small universe, while men do this gesture of “Let’s cut off the limb, cut off the roots, let’s embark.” Let’s go into more serious waters so you can see I’m not just dreaming about crazy ideas. Doesn’t Freud do something similar in “Moses and Monotheism”? We should read this book as precisely Freud’s answer to anti-Semitism. He doesn’t defend Jews, he strikes against Jews themselves. He deprives Jews of one of the most important parts of their legacy — his point was that Moses was not one of us. Which is why some of his friends were utterly shocked, “Oh my god, in these difficult times, you are taking from us one of our last pillars of hope.” I think Freud did the right thing. The Nazis believed that Jews were something special, albeit in a negative way. The true way to combat anti-Semitism is to do as Freud did, to say that “We are not what you secretly think that we are.”

Let me answer the second reproach, that these gestures are all masculine. No, not only such a radical act is not neutral but at the most radical level, it is a feminine gesture. Lacan proposed as one of the definitions of what he calls a “true woman” a certain act of taking from her partner, obliterating or destroying, that which means everything to him. The precious treasure around which their life turns. The exemplary figure of such an act in literature, of course, is Medea. Upon learning that Jason plans to abandon her, she kills her two young children, her husband’s most precious possession. Perhaps it is time against the overblown celebration of Antigone to reassert Medea, her uncanny counterpart.

To make this point clear, let me quote you perhaps the most tragic example of such a Medea-like act which constitutes modern subjectivity. Do you know Toni Morrison, her novel “Beloved”? We have exactly such an act there. This is the novel about the painful birth of African-American subjectivity. “Beloved” focuses on the traumatic desperate act of the heroine “Sita”. After escaping slavery in the middle of the last century with her four children, and then enjoying a month of the colored life in the North with her mother-in-law in Cincinnati, the cruel overseer of the plantation from which she escaped attempts to capture her by right of the fugitive slave law. Finding herself in a hopeless situation, she resorts to a radical measure in order to spare her children the return to bondage. She slices the throat of her eldest daughter, tries to kill two boys and bash out the brains of her infant daughter. Crucial to understand this desperate measure, let’s examine Sita’s apparently paradoxical ruminations. “If I hadn’t killed her, she would have died and that would have been something I could not have bared.” Killing her daughter was the only way to preserve the minimum dignity of her life. In an interview Morrison says “By what may seem the ultimate cruelty of killing her offspring, she is claiming her role as a parent, claiming the autonomy, the freedom she needs to protect her children and give them some dignity”. In a radical situation of a forced choice, in which because of slavery relations Sita’s children weren’t hers at all, the only way to protect them, to save their dignity, was to kill them.

The character of Sita’s act becomes clear if we compare it with what is perhaps one of its literary models, William Styron’s “Sophie’s Choice”, in which the heroine, confronted with the choice of saving one of her two children from the gas chamber, concedes to this blackmail by the Nazi officer and sacrifices her older daughter in order to save her young son, with the predictable result that this choice will haunt her for the rest of her life, driving her to suicide years later. Although Sita’s act haunts her as well, we’re dealing with the exact opposite action. While Sophie’s guilt results from her compromising attitude of accepting the terms of the choice, with Sita what she was not able to come to terms with was the properly ethical monstrosity of her act. At the end of the novel, the ghost of her daughter disappears and she can finally subjectize and assume her act. What makes her act so monstrous is, to use the Kierkegaardian term, the “suspension of the ethical” involved in it.

In reading of Antigone, Lacan emphasizes that after her excommunication from the community, she enters the domain of what in Greek is called ate, the domain of unspeakable horror of being between two deaths, still alive but excluded from the community. The same goes for Sita. Morrison has said that “She has stepped across the line. It’s understandable but it’s excessive. This is what the townspeople in Cincinnati respond to by excommunicating her. Not her grief, but her arrogance. They abandon her because of what they felt was her pride. Her statement about what is valuable to her damns what they think is valuable to them. They have had losses too. In her unwillingness to apologize or to bend, they know she would kill her child again. That is what separates her from them.” What makes her monstrous is not her act as such, but the way she refuses to relativize her act, accept responsibility and concede that she acted in an unforgivable way out of despair or madness. She doesn’t compromise, she says “No, it was a free act, not a desperate psychopathological confusion”. I claim that maybe, in Kosovo, the Serbs should do something the same, sacrifice Kosovo. That would be the only authentic political act in ex-Yugoslavia today.

Let me conclude with some remarks which explain, after my definition of the act, why I claim what is propagated as so-called human rights are ultimately the defense against this dimension of the act. Of course the problematic of human rights itself is much more complicated and not as self-evident as it may appear. The only way to grasp how human rights function today is as a systematic negation of the Decalogue. The right to privacy. This means you can cheat your wife as long as you are not caught in public. The right to freedom of press, what does it mean? Freedom to lie, in a way. The right to private property, what does it mean? Freedom to steal. The right to bear arms, freedom to kill. The right to religious freedom, the freedom to celebrate false gods. That’s another story. Although I basically support it, let me point out what I find problematic in the logic of human rights, and where would the true act be with regard to Kosovo.