They use some corpse; they change it to look like his own body. They plant this corpse, stage a pseudo-accident, so that police think he is dead.

And then, the agency organises an ultimate life in a nice villa somewhere around L.A. They even organise a nice lady who conveniently stumbles upon him when he is taking a walk along the beach.

He is thus reborn… no longer as a boring business man but as a modernist painter called Tony Wilson played by none other than Rock Hudson.

So, the woman, Nora, his new love, tries to engage him in life, even takes him to some wine orgy where people get drunk, dance naked and so on, everything seems ok … but Tony Wilson starts to miss his old life. More and more he is haunted by his past. Finally he breaks down, approaches again the agency telling them that he wants to return to his old life. The boss of this mysterious company, a kind of kindly cruel…

…superego paternal figure tells him the truth. He disappointed them by not being able to adapt himself to his new life.

So what went wrong here? The problem was that his past in it’s material existence was erased.

He lived in a totally new environment, new job, new friends and so on. What remained the same were his dreams because when the company organised his rebirth, when the company provided a new existence for him they simply followed his dreams. His dreams were wrong dreams and this is quite a deep lesson for the theory of ideology.

On the way to the operation hall, he discovers the horrible truth. He will not be reborn but he will be used as a cadaver for another person who wants to be reborn.

We should draw a line of distinction within the very field of our dreams. Between those who are the right dreams pointing towards a dimension effectively beyond our existing society and the wrong dreams: the dreams which are just an idealised consumerist reflection, mirror image of our society.

We are not simply submitted to our dreams – [i.e.] they just come from some unfathomable depths and we can’t do anything about it. This is the basic lesson of psychoanalysis and fiction cinema. We are responsible for our dreams. Our dreams stage our desires and our desires are not objective facts. We created them, we sustained them, we are responsible for them.

The scene of mass orgy in Zabriskie Point is a nice metaphor of what went wrong with the 1960s hippy revolution. It’s crucial that Zabriskie Point was made in 1970 when the authentic revolutionary energy of the sixties was already losing its strength. This orgy is somewhere between subversion of the existing social order and already the full estheticised reincorporation of this allegedly transgressive activities into the hegemonic ideology. Although Antonioni meant this as a kind of transcendence of the existing constraints, we can easily imagine this shot in some publicity campaign.

The first step to freedom isn’t just to change reality to fit your dreams it’s to change the way you dream. And again, this hurts, because all satisfactions we have come from our dreams.

One of the big problems of all great revolutionary movements of the 20th century such as Russia, Cuba or China, is that they did change the social body, but the egalitarian communist society was never realised. The dreams remained the old dreams and they turned into the ultimate nightmare. Now what remains for the radical left waits for a magical event when the true revolutionary agent will finally awaken. While the depressing lesson of the last decades is that capitalism has been the true revolutionising force. Even as it serves only itself. How come it is easier for us to imagine the end of all life on earth – an asteroid hitting the planet – than a modest change in our economic order?

Perhaps the time has come to set our possibilities straight and to become realists by way of demanding what appears as impossible in the economic domain. The surprising explosion of Occupy Wall Street protests, the mass mobilisation in Greece, the crowds on Tahrir Square – they all bear witness for the hidden potential for a different future. There is no guarantee that this future will arrive. No train of history on which we simply have to take a ride. It depends on us, on our will.

In revolutionary upheavals, some energy, or rather some utopian dreams, take place, they explode; and even if the actual result of a social upheaval is just a commercialised everyday life, this excess of energy, what gets lost in the result, persists – not in reality but as a dream haunting us, waiting to be redeemed. In this sense, whenever we are engaged in radical emancipatory politics, we should never forget as Walter Benjamin put it almost a century ago that every revolution is not only, if it is an authentic revolution, is not only directed towards the futures but it redeems also the past failed revolutions. All the ghosts as it were, the living dead of the past revolution, which are roaming around unsatisfied, will finally find their home in the new freedom.