Question: [inaudible] Have you changed, become less of a Marxist?

Zizek: No, not that I know. If anything at all I’ve become more of a Marxist. But you know what’s only my problem? In principle, of course, it’s clear that even now, I claim, the West basically wants Milosevic. It’s the same with Saddam Hussein. It’s absolutely clear that they want him in power, even pretty clear why, I claim, because of different geo-political considerations. The fear is that if Saddam falls, then Iraq disintegrates. If Iraq disintegrates, Iran will grasp it, and you have directly Iran versus Saudi Arabia, and so on and so on. I claim that for what the West perceives as the geo-political balance of the Middle East, the real fall of Saddam would have been the ultimate catastrophe for American interests. That is the unspoken secret I claim of American politics there.

As to Milosevic, no, of course I still subscribe all of that analysis. The only problem that I see is the following one: Of course Milosevic was the creation of the West, but in the same abstract sense that – let me take a leftist in the late ’30s or at the beginning of World War II. Of course as a Marxist you can say that fascism was the ultimate result of capitalism. But it doesn’t follow from this that you will not fight together with relatively liberal capitalists against fascism. The problem emerges at a point at which who will hegemonize. Again, it’s the battle for universality. How will the defeat of Hitler be interpreted? Will it be interpreted as just a defeat of some false distortion, or a defeat of something which was the inherent result of capitalist logic itself?

Just to conclude, another provocative statement: Buchanan is not so strong here. A better example than Buchanan would have been the European neo-populist right: Le Pen in France, Haider in Austria, even the so-called Republican Party in Germany. I always found suspicious the radical rejection of these extreme right-wingers. Again, do not misunderstand me, I am radically opposed to them. But I think that in the strategy of liberal hegemony, of the center left liberal attempt to crash the left, they play a crucial role. In what sense? First, they are the pariahs, they are the excluded ones, no? It’s a kind of a pact in Europe: Le Pen will never be in government; at least let’s hope not. Republicans in Germany will never be in government. But what I find so suspicious is that they’re excommunicated. They guarantee our solidarity. They provide to centrist liberals their freedom democratic credentials. This is their message to us, more radical leftists. We can hate each other whatsoever, but you see there is someone there, radical right, we exclude them. So I claim that they really need this radical right. It serves them to draw a certain line of separation so that then they can present themselves of the hegemonic force of democracy defending us against them.

There is even another much more uncanny and crucial aspect, which is that this so-called extreme right – strange as it may sound specifically today with this new “third way” social democracy – they are the only ones who still speak, or at least manipulate, with certain class struggle rhetoric. Do not underestimate, for example, Le Pen in France. He is not just a crazy racist. He’s much more intelligent. I saw four or five years ago a congress of the National Front where Le Pen brought to the podium a Jew, a black African Frenchman, and an Algerian, and embraced them, and said, “They are Frenchmen like me. My only enemy is the big international capital who is betraying us because of its multicultural internationalist orientation.” You know what I mean. The tragic thing is that the only one who still dares to interpolate in a perverted way – even Buchanan here – working-class interests are these radical right-wingers. And this is again where this elevation of the new populist right into a kind of excluded ultimate horror for the liberals plays a certain game. So taking all this into account, not; if anything at all, I’m even more Marxist.

In what sense? Let me prove it to you, my last remark: Richard Rorty, otherwise my good friend, if there ever was an honest liberal I think it’s Richard Rorty. Of course I disagree with him, of course when we take power he will go to gulag, but I will provide for him a nice cell with a double ration of meat every day, and so on. Why? Because he made a very intelligent observation, Rorty. Today’s official opponents, deconstructionists versus Habermasians and so on, they really seem to hate each other. But if you look closely – this was the nice common-sense observation of Rorty – whenever you touch a concrete political problem, basically the political distinction between Habermas and Derrida, who, as you probably know, cannot stand each other, disappears. Both occupy the same Left-of-center place. Okay, Derrida may be a little bit more messianic, but even Habermas now, Habermas is even not immune against this “post-secular” threat. This is the attitude that I really hate, which is why I prefer the Pope.

You know, this post-secular crap, it goes like this: Of course we no longer have the ontological god, but it is an Otherness which is a mystery; a gap is opened, something is present in the mode of absence. It’s always to come, it is never here, it’s the mystery of otherness to be respected. You know, that kind of stuff, which fits perfectly. And they all share this. So the conclusion of Rorty is that philosophical oppositions today do not matter, that they are irrelevant, that when it comes to politics, we speak all the same language.

I have a more radical, pessimistic conclusion. They do matter, and this precisely proves that, although they are officially opponents, share a whole set of secret presuppositions, and this is what should we attack. I can well tell you some philosophers who do not enter this consensus; for example, Heideggerians on the right, or Alain Badiou and some other people in France from the left side. So no, you don’t have to worry there. If anything, I am getting more into that direction. You know why? Because I think that, for example, let’s take just the example of Russia. I think it’s the Fukuyama illusion that Russia will be slowly reintegrated into the West. It cannot. The problem with global capitalism for me, it’s not that it’s global capitalism where bad American imperialists are penetrating everything with their culture; the problem is that it involves its own logic of exclusion. What interests me in global capitalism is how it structures the world into those who are in, and those who are out. And here I see its limitation, and here I see the tragic predicament and at the same time the hope of Russia.