Why? Let me add now a more specific improvisation on what happened in Yugoslavia, what is usually missed. I claim that those who defended Yugoslavia, or at least those who opposed the bombing, who had this idea of deploring the disintegration of Yugoslavia, also had the idea that republics who left Yugoslavia were somehow guilty of some almost, I’m tempted to say, primordial crime. For example, my country, Slovenia, is often painted as the one who is really the ultimate culprit. We were the first to leave Yugoslavia, and I often hear this argument: “And you even didn’t pay the price by first stepping out, you triggered the process. And where are the dead, where are the suffering? You didn’t pay any price” – as if somehow morally we should pay some price for it. What’s the problem here? The problem is that at the end, the one I claim who is really responsible for the disintegration of Yugoslavia, which is of course the Serbian Milosevic policy, is finally presented, perceived as a kind of almost defender of Yugoslavia. I claim that Yugoslavia died in ’86, the moment Milosevic took over. At that point the old formula of Yugoslavia dropped dead.

For example, it’s deeply significant that, with all its pro-fascist tendencies – I don’t know if you know this, but even such a degenerate, sad regime as the Tudjman regime in Croatia still acknowledges Tito and the old Yugoslav legacy as a legitimate tradition. Even if he is – and he definitely is – a proto-fascist figure, Tudjman still includes Tito within the great Croat legacy, or however he puts it. Another interesting point: Do you know that Bosnia, the Muslim Bosnia, was the only entity of ex-Yugoslavia where all the time during the Bosnian War, from ’91 till ’95-’96, in the Muslim part, Tito’s portraits were all the time still there in all – okay, most, at least – official buildings? That is to say, I claim that it’s politically a catastrophe, a total misperception of the situation, to describe the disintegration of Yugoslavia as separatists stepping out. No. The true separatist is only one: Milosevic. And I claim that the war between Bosnia and Yugoslavia was the war between what was, to put it conditionally, good about the old Titoist legacy, the war between the idea of a multicultural, tolerant – why not use these terms? – Yugoslavia and the new logic of nationalism. So it wasn’t simply a war between two ethnic groups. It was the war between multiculturalist legacy of the old Yugoslavia, which is why I tell to my friends who, for example, always, in order to show some kind of typically Western racist neutrality, always, whenever there were reports in the media about some Serb or Croat atrocities, were always obsessed by – this is already a tell-tale sign – by finding, by discovering also some Muslim atrocities in order to be able to play the game of, “You see, there are basically all the same, nobody is really innocent.”

But wait a minute, this is again one of these horrifying arguments for me. You can always prove that nobody is innocent. Of course. For example, Goebbels was totally right: the British invented concentration camps. They were not innocent. They bombed Dresden probably for not justified reasons, and so on and so on. But what’s the conclusion for this? Would you draw from this the conclusion that World War II was a war against European tribal madness, where only some benevolent foreign intervention could have solved it? This is again the example of hypocrisy. I claim that one fact is crucial for me in the analysis: It is that – and this, I think, shows the limit of even so-called – with whom I sympathize very much, I was a couple of times there – with so-called Serb anti-Milosevic democratic opposition. And you get in your media, I claim, a very watered down version, even now. For example, it was show on your TV, it was reported in the media how recently in Belgrade the demonstrators clashed with Milosevic police, demonstrators who wanted free elections, and then there was some fight, some blood. Was it reported here? The crucial point for me was what the demonstrators shouted at policemen. They shouted, “Murderers! Go to Kosovo and kill Albanians!” So much for Serb democratic opposition. All the time their reproach to Milosevic, even now, is not new democratic tolerant Serbia, but it is: You lost Kosovo, you betrayed us. Get my point: Even the most radical democratic Serb opposition, at least those who are organized politically, accept basically this national agenda. Their approach to Milosevic is basically, “You lost half of the Serbian territory,” not, “You are non-democratic,” and so on. That’s secondary.

Another thing which seems to me crucial: There are some – and I honor them, they are incredibly courageous – small human rights groups of Serbs who condemn Serb crimes in Kosovo. But it’s interesting that it’s again the logic of victimization. They condemn crimes against Albanians as victims. Okay, I accept it. But – and that’s for me the true limitation – I know of no political power in Serbia who would go a step further and offer a political – not just sympathize with Albanians and victims – but propose a political platform which would directly address also Albanians as political subjects. Absolutely no one as far as I know does that, in contrast, I claim, to other, at least to most, of the ex-Yugoslav republics where this does happen. For example, it’s for me a very significant fact that in the Bosnian War the commander of the so-called Muslim army under the Sarajevo government was a Serb. Did you know this? It was a Serb. It was a truly multi-national task, armed force. So again, what I’m trying to say is that this idea that Yugoslavia somehow disintegrated because of some nationalist madness, and the main thing is to teach the people to be tolerant, to work with each other, and so on and so on, I think that it is totally misleading. The problem is not tolerance. You cannot treat people like children and tell them, “Don’t fight each other,” and so on. The problem is the concrete dynamic, political power dynamic, where, again, all sides are simply not equal. Again, I repeat, the war between Bosnia and Serbia, or ex-Yugoslavia, was not simply the war between the two ethnic groups; it was the war between the two different political concepts, the legacy of the old Titoist Yugoslavia and a new nationalist logic. Which is why I claim those left-wingers who really like to insist on the precious legacy of the old Yugoslavia should be unconditionally on the Muslim side. The moment they do not accept this, the moment they treat all the warring factions, as they put it, as equal, they already take the Serb side. This is not a neutral statement. This very neutral case which says, “It’s all a catastrophe, it doesn’t matter who is guilty, just stop killing each other, learn to live with each other” – this is not a neutral case.