So, to go further with what I mean by this. Do you know that there is a … Ok, I will slowly come to an end, but nonetheless, I will develop this. I think we should use … Let’s do a little bit of theology, materialist theology, Blaise Pascal. You know his idea of miracles and deus absonditus. You know, the hidden god. He has a wonderful notion of a miracle. He says that god had a choice of either openly revealing himself, through miracles, which are here to all, but he says, in this way, it wouldn’t be productive, good for ethical attitude, because then, any idiot, if you see the definitive proof of god, you will follow it. On the other hand, if god is too hidden, then it’s nothing. So, he proposes a wonderful idea of miracles, which are miracles visible as such as miracles, only to those who believe. It’s kind of a hermeneutic circle. Things happen, if you are what Pascal calls a libertine, and it’s very interesting, incidentally, a very short historical notice here. How we are here in 17th century, where libertinage meant something totally different than in 18th century, it’s a wonderful shift. 17th century libertinage meant an atheist simply, the one who doesn’t believe. But nothing to do with some sexual promiscuity or whatever. It’s only in the 18th century that it acquires this sexual decadence connotation. So again, Pascal’s idea is that this is how god is testing us. There is something which happens. If you are a libertine, of course you will say: ‘this is just a coincidence, the result of chance’, blablabla. Only if you believe in it do you see it as a miracle. And I think this exactly is the status, the way to read in a non-teleological way. We should pass, ironically, from reviled communism to maybe not god, but communism absconditus. There are signs, wonderful things are happening here and there, but we absolutely no ontological guarantee, no historical necessity will make – if we believe in it, it’s a miracle. Which means, if we will do something, out of it. It’s absolutely crucial, not to fall, and Marx did fall into it, into this ontological trap. We have fragile signs, here and there. If I can give you a wonderful example, I will try to be as short as possible. Not only in politics, this is how I propose to read, for example, Tahrir square, even Occupy Wall Street – it’s maybe a sign of something. Of what? What the fuck do I know. Will something come out of it? Maybe, maybe not. But we nonetheless should treat them as miracles. For example, a Pascalian libertine would say: ‘so what, people demonstrated on Tahrir square, it was just the result of a historical situation, contingent, even now they got what they deserved, a new Muslim brotherhood government.’ That’s the cynical reading. I think we should be a little bit more naive: ‘It’s a sign, but a sign of a possible future.’ But I read this sign, of course, as a miracle only in a totally non-teleological way. A sign that if you believe – I don’t even like the term belief here – if you are politically engaged in this way, it maybe shows some potential. Without any guarantee.

I would now like to give you, in order to conclude, for example, a domain where I found such a wonderful sign, which I think we should read with all naivety. A guy called Daniel Pink wrote a book Drive, it is a book about a very naive social experiment. They took a group of American students, listen carefully, and gave them different jobs, and compared how they do when differently paid. Low payment, mid payment, high payment. And they made a wonderful strange discovery. That if the job is stupid, non-satisfactory, you just do it for the money, then money matters. You pay people little, they do it so-so. You pay them more, they will do it better. But they made a wonderful discovery. If a job is intellectually challenging, satisfying, whatever you want, like a true enigma, which engages you, then – this is the beauty – then it is not only that money doesn’t matter, the beauty is that money is even counterproductive. If you pay them a little bit, they do it so-so. If you pay them a little bit more, they will do it a little bit better. BUT! if you pay them too much, they will do it worse. And then they thought: ‘it must be some American perversion.’ So, they did something wonderful. They repeated the same experiment in the poorest Indian villages, and the result was the same. Isn’t this almost like communism? You can prove not only that money does not matter, but if you have some … For example, I read a wonderful sociological text of… they analyse how, close to here, CERN, here they will ruin us all, reproduce the big bang. As we know it will be the end of the world. This is how they are there. You know, you are well enough paid to live moderately well, but the job is so engaging that, if you were to introduce that, if you are the first one to discover the Hicks particle, you get one million or whatever, it wouldn’t make it better, it would make it worse. Now, we should not overestimate this kind of stuff, but nonetheless admit it very modestly. It proves at least something – that capitalist egotism is not natural. That you can, when you are part of a creative process – and again, I am not saying that money doesn’t matter, I am here very cynical … In order to say ‘money doesn’t matter’, you have to have enough money. What I am nonetheless saying is that after a certain level, it does function, as a sense of motivation. Financial motivation can even be counterproductive. So again, these are I think the signs as it were. The signs we should be looking for.