We can see how ideology works effectively here. We have two superficial levels. All the fascination of the accident, then the love story. But all this which is quite acceptable for our liberal progressive minds, all this is just a trap. Something to lower our attention threshold, as it were, to open us up, to be ready to accept the true conservative message of rich people having tried to revitalise themselves by ruthlessly appropriating the vitality of the poor people.

There is a wonderful detail which tells everything.

When Kate Winslet notices that Leonardo Dicaprio is dead she, of course, starts to shout…

…while at the same moment she pushes him off.

She is what we may call ironically a vanishing mediator. This logic of the production of the couple has a long history in Hollywood. Whatever the story is about, it may be about the end of the world, an asteroid threatening the very survival of humanity, or a great war, whatever.

As a rule, we always have a couple whose link is threatened and who somehow through this ordeal at the end happily gets together. This logic does not count only for Hollywood films.

In the late forties, in Soviet Union, they produced arguably one of the most expensive films of all times: The Fall of Berlin. The chronicle of the Second World War from the Soviet standpoint. And it’s incredible how closely this film also follows the logic of the production of a couple. The story begins just before the German attack on the Soviet Union when the model worker who is in love with a local girl but is too shy to propose to her, is called to Moscow to get a medal from Comrade Stalin. There Stalin notices his confusion, distress, and Stalin gives him some advice, which poetry to quote and so on.

This part unfortunately was lost because in the background of this scene there was Beria, a Soviet politician who after Stalin’s death became a non-person, was shot as a traitor. But we know from the screenplay what was there. If Stalin gives you love advice it has to succeed so the couple embraces.

He tells her probably to make love. At that very moment there is the triumphant violent entrance of the obstacle: German planes come, dropping bombs.

The girl is taken prisoner.

The boy of course joins the red army and we follow him through all the great battles. The idea being that in a deeper logic of the film, what these battles were about was really to recreate the couple. The boy has to get his girl. This is what happens at the end, but in a very strange way, which reconfirms Stalin’s role as the supreme divine matchmaker.

The scene itself, Stalin emerging himself into a crowd of ordinary people never happened. Stalin was totally paranoiac about flying, about taking planes. But, none the less when he saw this scene he cried.

Of course, he himself, as you know, wrote the lines. When the couple encounters each other the girl first sees Stalin, then she turns around and, surprised, sees her lover for whom she was waiting all the time of the war. So it’s only through the presence of Stalin that the couple gets reunited.

This is how ideology works. Not the explicit ideology of the film which we hear at the end Stalin saying: now all the free people will enjoy peace and so on and so on, but precisely ideology at its more fundamental. This apparently totally subordinated motive, unimportant in itself – the story of a couple – this is what is the key element, which holds the entire film together, that small surplus element which attracts us, which maintains our attention. This is how ideology works.

We usually think that military discipline is just a matter of mindlessly following orders, obeying the rules. You don’t think you do what is your duty. It’s not as simple as that. If we do this, we just become machines. There has to be something more. This more can have two basic forms. The first more benign form is an ironic distance. Best epitomised by the well known movie and TV series M.A.S.H.

Where the military doctors are involved in sexual escapades, make jokes all the time. Some people took Robert Altman’s movie M.A.S.H. as a kind of antimilitary, satiric product but it’s not. We should always bear in mind that these soldiers with all their practical jokes, making fun of the superiors and so on, operated perfectly as soldiers. They did their duty.

Much more ominous is a kind of obscene supplement to pure military discipline. In practically all movies about U.S. Marines, the best-known embodiment of this obscenity are marching chants – a mixture of nonsense…

…and obscenity. This is not undermining, making fun of military discipline. It is it’s inner most constituent. You take this obscene supplement away and military machine stops working.