Zizek: What do you want? And it’s incredible how, apart from, either abstract moralism: ‘we want a just society, where money serves people, not people serve money.’ Well my god, my answer was: ‘Hitler would have fully agreed with it, no?/ I mean, you don’t get, correct me if I am wrong, I don’t think, apart from some old-fashioned Keynesian ideas of regulation and so on, did you ever encounter any concrete plan of what to do? And I know it first-hand, I met him, to boast, you can check it on TV. I was, this Sunday, four days ago, in Athens, I had a long conversation with Alexis Tsipras, and yes, absolutely no idea. Do you see my problem? Now that there should have been a, in classical Marxist terms, a revolutionary situation, no? you get more than ever. What you get is exactly nothing.

So, I agree with T.J. Clark, that one of the problems is the following one. The left, even if it is now a democratic left, or whatever, they still maintain, what T.J. Clark calls this eschatological attitude of: ‘ok, now, times are tough, no left movement, but we must be patient and work towards some big magic moment when, I don’t know, the true working class will arise, all people, all the marginal groups…’ It doesn’t matter. We are slowly, in the underground, working, digging for the big moment. And I tend to agree with it – we should drop this. There never will be this big moment. You know, all of them, are dreaming about this. Even, Hardt & Negri have this. Look at the last pages of Empire. I am sorry that he is not here – Hardt. All of a sudden, he says: ‘now that we have this multitude resistance, but the moment will come, when all the multitudes will get together, take over, and so on.’ And then, the only reference he can give is St. Franciscus, no other. So, I think that this is the limit, and I am saying this as still some kind of a leftist, but not a naive leftist. Leftist in the sense that I am a catastrophist. We are approaching deep shit, a critical situation. No, I think that simply it cannot go on indefinitely the way it is now. Well, wait a little bit what will happen, maybe in a couple of months in Europe and so on. I am not saying it will be a big catastrophe. I am just saying, what is obvious now. You know, that the crisis we are entering now is not the old crisis of, you know, part of what in the Lion King they call ‘the circle of life,’ it goes down. Now this reminds me, when I was young I had a wonderful racist teacher, who made fun of Roma – gypsies – and he said, he said a wonderful thing. ‘When there is sun, the gypsies are sad. Because they know, that after the sun there will be rain. And when it is raining, the gypsies are glad, because they know that after the rain, there will be sun.’ This was the usual attitude. Crisis is just a moment of withdrawal to have a new explosion. I think, even if this is in some sense true, we are really entering a long-term crisis. Who knows what will happen. So, again, this is the problem. We have to drop, really drop, the Marxist eschatology of, again, this history moves towards a big awakening. Even if it’s not a Marxist … but this idea, and here I am even having five percent ironic stab at our good friend Alain Badiou, who also is, I think, basically, if I may put it like this, one of those who wait for the event, no? It will happen? It will not happen. This is unfortunately for me the lesson of today. With all the unrests we have. Well, up until now at least the only result of these unrests is what? that leftist governments are replaced by right-wing governments.

Now, am I saying that this is the end? That we should simply accept that the rule of the game is global world-wide capitalism. No! This would mean a too easy way out. I think that I am still a pessimist. I think that if we allow things to go on the way they go on, we are approaching some kind of new authoritarian society and so on. So what can we do? I would like to quote here Walter Benjamin, in Arcades Project, where he develops this. Walter Benjamin quotes there the French historian André [Monglond]. Everybody knows this famous metaphor, I quote:

You know, this idea that if we can have events today which are signs, but signs, not symptoms from the past, but signs from the future. They point towards … It is as if they are coming from the future. Only from the future will they be readable. I would like to have this metaphor. In all this radicality, we have to drop direct teleology, radically. You know, the Marxist way would have been: ‘yeah, of course, we have already the germs of communism today.’ Well, maybe it’s true, but we definitely don’t know what this communism will be. Like, my idea is the following one. That we should maybe return, to be very brief, from Marx back to Hegel. Into this tragic vision. Yes! we live today in signs from the future, and I’m ready, in a naive idealized way even, to say, like, what happened in Tahrir square, it was, admit it, in a way, a miracle. A sign of a better future. Listen! Nobody expected it to be possible. Most of us were usual racists, and we thought: ‘all stupid Arabs can do, is some … if you want to arouse the masses there’ … what? You need religious fundamentalism, anti-Semitism, nationalism, whatever. Sorry, we had a big rebellion, which PRECISELY did not use any of these resources. So, miracles happen. But what we should ABSOLUTELY reject is the teleology of ‘Ah! we see the tendency of history, there is the light at the end of the tunnel.’ I am here, I am coming from Eastern Europe, and you know what we say when somebody says that there is a light at the end of the tunnel? We say, ‘of course there is, it is another train coming.’ No?