A guy whom I appreciate very much although he’s my political opponent, the best known Serb political commentator, Aleksandr Tijanic, he says that we Serbs have one big public secret, a secret which everybody knows that it’s a secret: We don’t give a damn about Kosovo. We want to get rid of Kosovo. This is not a myth. The reaction of certain, practically most of the Serbia, this also explains in a way why Milosevic didn’t lose as much as people expected when he lost Kosovo. It was that they really didn’t care about Kosovo. I claim that the attitude of the average Serb is not, “My god, we lost our cradle, we must get it back.” No. The attitude of every Serb is, Good riddance. We got rid of that stupid part which only bring us trouble. I found this quite a sane attitude.

Question: [inaudible] it seems you were trying to theorize a kind of radical social change [inaudible] through Christianity. I was wondering how this symbolic death is different from the [inaudible]

Zizek: Okay, I see your point, yes. What I would say here is that maybe, if I gave the impression that I aimed at such a quick transition, no, I don’t aim at such a quick transition; that is to say, I don’t think you can in this way directly connect the two aspects. What I was only trying to say is that the very imaginary, the very functioning of universe, ideological coordinates, which enables us even to think in terms of radically breaking out of the cycle of tradition and so on and so on is possible only through this, what I consider as – I don’t see it anywhere else – the Christian logic. The message of Christianity is not for me God, all this Christian stuff: God, Christ; but that the good news, the gospel, is that you can erase the past. It is possible to begin from a zero point. This is the fascinating moment that I found in Christianity; that we are no longer this pagan universe of global order, where you must make compromises, this and that -instead you can erase and start from new. This is how I read, for example, that Christian, well-known phrase that if somebody slaps you on your right cheek, you turn the other cheek. It’s not a kind of a masochism. The idea is to how to break out of this logic of revenge, tit for tat. The idea is that you can break this logic of balanced exchange. I hope it’s clear what I was claiming. What I was claiming is that the deepest core of the pre-Christian universe is this notion of cosmic balance. There is some kind of a cosmic balance, and if you disturb the balance it must be reestablished. I claim that Christianity breaks with this. This is for me the big choice, where I’m frankly on the side of the Christian logic. Of course there is a certain, I claim, false ideological, ecological, whatever, usually oriented reasoning which claims, but isn’t precisely Christianity here at the origins of modern subjectivity, which is the cause of our terrible ecological predicament. My answer to this is no. My answer to this is that it’s easy to attack today Cartesian subjectivity – but there is no feminism without Cartesian subjectivity, I claim. Because what’s crucial for Cartesian subjectivity is precisely the idea of the abstract, of this immediate access to abstraction. Now back to your question, which I would have to elaborate, which is human rights. Well, my answer would be the following one: The notion of human rights is a much more ambiguous notion than it may appear. I am tempted to endorse human rights only when one qualifies them. The first paradox of human rights is of course that human rights by definition are never a definite list of human rights. Human rights always – by definition you never have all of them. You know what I mean. Human rights always means there is something more. You cannot simply objectify them and say that’s a series of human rights. Human rights always have this – there is something terroristic in them. Ultimately – to cut a long story short, I talk too much – my answer to you about human rights in this Vaclav Havel version of humanism would be that this is not necessarily a consequence of humanity. Incidentally, typically, Havel is not a Christian, he is a New Ager, incidentally. He is explicitly a New Ager. I claim that on the contrary, Christian logic, if you follow it closely, it’s not a logic of the Church, but it’s a fighting logic. Precisely what people deplore in St. Paul I appreciate in St. Paul. Not human rights; it’s us versus them. Universality is a fighting position. Universality – it’s not a position where we fight each other but beyond or beneath, whichever way you point it, there are some fundamental rights. No. No. Christianity means us against them. It means universality is a position of struggle. The conflict is not the conflict between two particular groups. The moment you conceive the conflict as the conflict between the two particular groups, you can play the pagan games: the balance, compromise, and so on. From a Christian perspective, the conflict is the conflict between the global order and this radical universality. I see Christianity in this sense as an extremely politicized religion, if you want to put it this way. It’s really a religion of a new community.

Moderator: If I can abuse my position here, what would the Christian war about Kosovo have looked like? If the problem was that it was a depoliticized, humanitarian, soft, compromising, mushy war on behalf of victims, what would a good, robust, political, Christian war have been?

Zizek: Okay, my first paradox is the following one: To clarify my position about bombing Kosovo, the position of those who support the human rights but deplore this bombing is, in principle, “We are for human rights” and so on, but in this case it’s clear that it was biased, and so on and so on. So they are for it in principle, but here they deplore it. My position is exactly the opposite. I’m in principle against justification of bombing in this abstract reference to human rights, but I think in this concrete case it was clearly a success, it did achieve, so I think it’s absolutely hypocritical to deplore it. It’s easy for a Western academic from his or her safe position to deplore it. I think one must simply accept this, accept this paradox.